life would have been entirely different. She would have gone, with the
Valancy wakened early, in the lifeless, hopeless hour just preceding
when one is twenty-nine on the morrow, and unmarried, in a community
and connection where the unmarried are simply those who have failed to
Deerwood and the Stirlings had long since relegated Valancy to hopeless
yet—never, until this wet, horrible morning, when she wakened to the
Ay, _there_ lay the sting. Valancy did not mind so much being an old
The tears came into her eyes as she lay there alone in the faintly
to, for two reasons. She was afraid that crying might bring on another
attack of that pain around the heart. She had had a spell of it after
she had got into bed—rather worse than any she had had yet. And she was
afraid her mother would notice her red eyes at breakfast and keep at
her with minute, persistent, mosquito-like questions regarding the
cause thereof.
“Suppose,” thought Valancy with a ghastly grin, “I answered with the
Mother would be—though she is ashamed every day of her life of her old
hear her mother’s prim, dictatorial voice asserting, “it is not
The thought of her mother’s expression made Valancy laugh—for she had a
sense of humour nobody in her clan suspected. For that matter, there
laughter was very superficial and presently she lay there, a huddled,
futile little figure, listening to the rain pouring down outside and
watching, with a sick distaste, the chill, merciless light creeping
She knew the ugliness of that room by heart—knew it and hated it. The
yellow-painted floor, with one hideous, “hooked” rug by the bed, with a
the faded, dark-red paper; the ceiling discoloured by old leaks and
crossed by cracks; the narrow, pinched little washstand; the
brown-paper lambrequin with purple roses on it; the spotted old
looking-glass with the crack across it, propped up on the inadequate
dressing-table; the jar of ancient potpourri made by her mother in her
mythical honeymoon; the shell-covered box, with one burst corner, which
Cousin Stickles had made in her equally mythical girlhood; the beaded
pincushion with half its bead fringe gone; the one stiff, yellow chair;
the faded old motto, “Gone but not forgotten,” worked in coloured yarns
about Great-grand-mother Stirling’s grim old face; the old photographs
of ancient relatives long banished from the rooms below. There were
unhappy. That forlorn little dog crouched on the doorstep in the
driving rain! Why didn’t _some one_ open the door and let him in? The
other picture was a faded, passe-partouted engraving of Queen Louise
destroy it or remove it. Mother and Cousin Stickles would have been
Every room in the house was ugly, of course. But downstairs appearances
herself, even without money, if she were permitted. But her mother had
never persisted. She was afraid to. Her mother could not brook
opposition. Mrs. Stirling would sulk for days if offended, with the
there at night to cry if she wanted to.
permitted to stay alone in her room for any other purpose. People who
her room in the Blue Castle was everything a room should be.
was wont to let herself go rather splendidly in her day-dreams. Nobody
in the Stirling clan, or its ramifications, suspected this, least of
all her mother and Cousin Stickles. They never knew that Valancy had
two homes—the ugly red brick box of a home, on Elm Street, and the Blue
Castle in Spain. Valancy had lived spiritually in the Blue Castle ever
it plainly, with its turrets and banners on the pine-clad mountain
height, wrapped in its faint, blue loveliness, against the sunset skies
and down them; courts, marble-pillared, where shimmering fountains fell
and nightingales sang among the myrtles; halls of mirrors that
reflected only handsome knights and lovely women—herself the loveliest
of all, for whose glance men died. All that supported her through the
boredom of her days was the hope of going on a dream spree at night.
Most, if not all, of the Stirlings would have died of horror if they
had known half the things Valancy did in her Blue Castle.
One who wooed her with all the romantic ardour of the age of chivalry
wedded to her with pomp and circumstance in the great, banner-hung
chapel of the Blue Castle.
and rugged rather than handsome. Valancy never grew older than
I don’t say Valancy deliberately murdered these lovers as she outgrew
them. One simply faded away as another came. Things are very convenient
But, on this morning of her day of fate, Valancy could not find the key
undesired, ill-favoured—the only homely girl in a handsome clan, with
as she could look forward it seemed certain to be just the same until
she was nothing but a solitary, little withered leaf clinging to a
live for—neither love, duty, purpose nor hope—holds for her the
She was glad it was raining—or rather, she was drearily satisfied that
whereby Aunt and Uncle Wellington—one always thought of them in that
succession—inevitably celebrated their engagement at a picnic thirty
Valancy. By an impish coincidence it was the same day as her birthday
Much as she hated going to the picnic, it would never have occurred to
her to rebel against it. There seemed to be nothing of the
say to her at the picnic. Uncle Wellington, whom she disliked and
despised even though he had fulfilled the highest Stirling aspiration,
getting married yet, my dear?” and then go off into the bellow of
would have to look as pleased and interested as if the dress and letter
had long ago decided that she would rather offend God than Aunt
to her husband as “he,” as if he were the only male creature in the
“I don’t know why all the girls of today are so sunburned. When _I_ was
a girl my skin was roses and cream. I was counted the prettiest girl in
jocularly, “How fat you’re getting, Doss!” And then everybody would
laugh over the excessively humorous idea of poor, scrawny little Doss
because he was reputed to be very clever and was therefore the clan
oracle—brains being none too plentiful in the Stirling connection—would
probably remark with the owl-like sarcasm that had won him his
reputation, “I suppose you’re busy with your hope-chest these days?”
wheezy chuckles, and answer them himself.
“What is the difference between Doss and a mouse?
“The mouse wishes to harm the cheese and Doss wishes to charm the
wanted to throw something at him. But she never did. In the first
place, the Stirlings simply did not throw things; in the second place,
been brought up in the fear and admonition of his money. If she
been poor all her life and knew the galling bitterness of it. So she
endured his riddles and even smiled tortured little smiles over them.
thought, but didn’t like it so well when other people said what _they_
Cousin Georgiana—named after her great-great-grand-mother, who had been
named after George the Fourth—would recount dolorously the names of all
relatives and friends who had died since the last picnic and wonder
“which of us will be the first to go next.”
would be the only one she could find to put up with it. For the same
according to the strict way in which the Stirlings tabulated
disposition, would describe minutely the tortures of her neuritis. And
Olive, the wonder girl of the whole Stirling clan, who had everything
There would be none of all this today. And there would be no packing up
Wellington’s wedding set had been lost. Valancy never heard the last of
Oh, yes, Valancy knew exactly what the picnic would be like and she
blessed the rain that had saved her from it. There would be no picnic
this year. If Aunt Wellington could not celebrate on the sacred day
itself she would have no celebration at all. Thank whatever gods there
Since there would be no picnic, Valancy made up her mind that, if the
rain held up in the afternoon, she would go up to the library and get
another of John Foster’s books. Valancy was never allowed to read
books”—so the librarian told Mrs. Frederick Stirling—“all about the
was allowed to read them—under protest, for it was only too evident
that she enjoyed them too much. It was permissible, even laudable, to
enjoyable was dangerous. Valancy did not know whether her mind was
might once have entered, though the door was forever barred to her now.
It was only within the last year that John Foster’s books had been in
the Deerwood library, though the librarian told Valancy that he had
them in at all, though I really can’t see what people find in them to
“I think they’re wonderful,” said Valancy, timidly.
But certainly Foster seems to know all there is to know about them.”
Valancy didn’t know whether she cared much for bugs either. It was not
further on—some faint, elusive echo of lovely, forgotten things—John
_Thistle Harvest_, so surely Mother could not object. Valancy had read
pain around the heart. It had come rather often lately, and the
him without telling any one? It was a most daring thought. None of the
getting Uncle James’ approval. _Then_, they went to Dr. Ambrose Marsh
to Port Lawrence, fifteen miles away, without being taken there. She
fuss made and every member of the family would come down and talk it
quite sure there was nothing at all seriously wrong with her heart and
no need of all the pother that would ensue if she mentioned it. She
bill, she had the two hundred dollars that her father had put in the
bank for her the day she was born. She was never allowed to use even
the interest of this, but she would secretly take out enough to pay Dr.
practitioner in out-of-the-world Deerwood. Dr. Trent was over seventy
and there had been rumours that he meant to retire soon. None of the
Presbyterian when all the Stirlings went to the Anglican church. But
Valancy, between the devil of disloyalty to clan and the deep sea of
fuss and clatter and advice, thought she would take a chance with the
this morning than ever she had before. What was there to get up for?
Another dreary day like all the days that had preceded it, full of
breakfast at eight o’clock. Hard and fast times for meals were the rule
The room was bitterly cold with the raw, penetrating chill of a wet May
Frederick’s rules that no fires were necessary after the twenty-fourth
of May. Meals were cooked on the little oil-stove in the back porch.
lighted until the twenty-first of October by the calendar. On the
twenty-first of October Mrs. Frederick began cooking over the kitchen
range and lighted a fire in the sitting-room stove in the evenings. It
was whispered about in the connection that the late Frederick Stirling
had caught the cold which resulted in his death during Valancy’s first
year of life because Mrs. Frederick would not have a fire on the
twentieth of October. She lighted it the next day—but that was a day
Valancy took off and hung up in the closet her nightdress of coarse,
into the habit of doing her hair with the shade of the window by the
plainly then. But this morning she jerked the shade to the very top and
looked at herself in the leprous mirror with a passionate determination
to see herself as the world saw her.
The result was rather dreadful. Even a beauty would have found that
short and thin, always lustreless despite the fact that she gave it one
hundred strokes of the brush, neither more nor less, every night of her
life and faithfully rubbed Redfern’s Hair Vigor into the roots, more
flat-breasted, rather below the average height. She had somehow escaped
the family high cheek-bones, and her dark-brown eyes, too soft and
her eyes she was neither pretty nor ugly—just insignificant-looking,
she concluded bitterly. How plain the lines around her eyes and mouth
fashion, but they had been in when Valancy first put her hair up and
“It is the _only_ way that becomes you. Your face is so small that you
puffs above the ears, as Olive was wearing hers. But Aunt Wellington’s
of hairdressing again. But then, there were so many things Valancy
From the very dawn of recollection, when she had been so horribly
afraid of the big black bear that lived, so Cousin Stickles told her,
in the closet under the stairs.
Afraid of her mother’s sulky fits—afraid of offending Uncle
disapproval—afraid of offending the whole clan’s opinions and
again. Twenty-nine, unmarried, undesired—what had she to do with the
fairy-like chatelaine of the Blue Castle? She would cut such childish
the view always struck her like a blow; the ragged fence, the
tumble-down old carriage-shop in the next lot, plastered with crude,
violently coloured advertisements; the grimy railway station beyond,
with the awful derelicts that were always hanging around it even at
this early hour. In the pouring rain everything looked worse than
usual, especially the beastly advertisement, “Keep that schoolgirl
just the trouble. There was not a gleam of beauty anywhere—“exactly
them. She was one of the people whom life always passes by. There was
Breakfast was always the same. Oatmeal porridge, which Valancy loathed,
chillier and gloomier than usual; the rain streamed down outside the
window; departed Stirlings, in atrocious, gilt frames, wider than the
pictures, glowered down from the walls. And yet Cousin Stickles wished
Valancy many happy returns of the day!
“Sit up straight, Doss,” was all her mother said.
Valancy sat up straight. She talked to her mother and Cousin Stickles
of the things they always talked of. She never wondered what would
silence for which Valancy was rather grateful. But Christine Stickles
whined endlessly on as usual, complaining about everything—the weather,
the leak in the pantry, the price of oatmeal and butter—Valancy felt at
once she had buttered her toast too lavishly—the epidemic of mumps in
“Doss will be sure to ketch them,” she foreboded.
every winter. Doss’ winter colds were a sort of tradition in the
family. Nothing, it seemed, could prevent her from catching them. Mrs.
Frederick and Cousin Stickles did their heroic best. One winter they
kept Valancy housed up from November to May, in the warm sitting-room.
So that was the trouble. It was all Valancy’s own fault.
Valancy Jane. Valancy Jane was rather terrible, but she liked Valancy,
with its odd, out-land tang. It was always a wonder to Valancy that the
her maternal grandfather, old Amos Wansbarra, had chosen the name for
her. Her father had tacked on the Jane by way of civilising it, and the
whole connection got out of the difficulty by nicknaming her Doss. She
“Mother,” she said timidly, “would you mind calling me Valancy after
“What is the matter with Doss?”
“Oh!” Mrs. Frederick had been a Wansbarra and the Wansbarra smile was
not an asset. “I see. Well, it should suit _you_ then. You are childish
“I am twenty-nine,” said the dear child desperately.
“I wouldn’t proclaim it from the house-tops if I were you, dear,” said
Valancy looked at them furtively. Mrs. Frederick, except for those
terrible glasses and the hooked nose that made her look more like a
right on the end of her dumpy nose, bristling hairs on her chin,
one—needed by some one. No one in the whole world needed her, or would
disappointment to her mother. No one loved her. She had never so much
It rained all the forenoon without cessation. Valancy pieced a quilt.
Valancy hated piecing quilts. And there was no need of it. The house
the attic. Mrs. Frederick had begun storing away quilts when Valancy
was seventeen and she kept on storing them, though it did not seem
likely that Valancy would ever need them. But Valancy must be at work
sin in the Stirling household. When Valancy had been a child she had
all the minutes she had spent in idleness that day. On Sundays her
mother made her tot them up and pray over them.
“The woods are so human,” wrote John Foster, “that to know them one
must live with them. An occasional saunter through them, keeping to the
well-trodden paths, will never admit us to their intimacy. If we wish
to be friends we must seek them out and win them by frequent, reverent
seasons, in spring, in summer, in autumn, in winter. Otherwise we can
never really know them and any pretence we may make to the contrary
will never impose on them. They have their own effective way of keeping
aliens at a distance and shutting their hearts to mere casual
sightseers. It is of no use to seek the woods from any motive except
sheer love of them; they will find us out at once and hide all their
sweet, old-world secrets from us. But if they know we come to them
because we love them they will be very kind to us and give us such
market-place. For the woods, when they give at all, give unstintedly
and hold nothing back from their true worshippers. We must go to them
poignant loveliness lurks in the wild places and silent intervals,
them. Then the immortal heart of the woods will beat against ours and
drawn back to the forest to find our most enduring kinship.”
“Doss,” called her mother from the hall below, “what are you doing all
to her patches; but she felt the strange exhilaration of spirit that
Foster’s books. Valancy did not know much about woods—except the
always secretly hankered after them and a Foster book about woods was
the next best thing to the woods themselves.
At noon it stopped raining, but the sun did not come out until three.
“What do you want to go uptown for?” demanded her mother.
“I want to get a book from the library.”
“You got a book from the library only last week.”
“Really it was, Mother.”
she wants a walk—though this damp weather is bad for colds.”
They argued the matter for ten minutes longer and finally Mrs.
Frederick agreed rather grudgingly that Valancy might go.
“Got your rubbers on?” called Cousin Stickles, as Valancy left the
“Mother, I don’t _need_ a flannel petticoat. My sateen one is warm
hurling the rubber-plant into the street before she went. She hated
that grey flannel petticoat more than any other garment she owned.
sheer lawn and filmy laced flounces. But Olive’s father had “married
money” and Olive never had bronchitis. So there you were.
“Are you sure you didn’t leave the soap in the water?” demanded Mrs.
Frederick. But Valancy was gone. She turned at the corner and looked
back down the ugly, prim, respectable street where she lived. The
Stirling house was the ugliest on it—more like a red brick box than
bulbous glass cupola on top. About it was the desolate, barren peace of
gables, just around the corner—a new house, one of those houses you
love the minute you see them. Clayton Markley had built it for his
“I don’t envy Jennie the man,” thought Valancy sincerely—Clayton
Markley was not one of her many ideals—“but I _do_ envy her the house.
own—ever so poor, so tiny—but my own! But then,” she added bitterly,
“there is no use in yowling for the moon when you can’t even get a
younger. Yet she was to have this delightful house. And the nicest
little Wedgwood teacups—Valancy had seen them; an open fireplace, and
_everything_ come to some girls and _nothing_ to others? It wasn’t
hat, splashed occasionally by the mud of a passing motor with its
insulting shrieks. Motors were still rather a novelty in Deerwood,
though they were common in Port Lawrence, and most of the summer
residents up at Muskoka had them. In Deerwood only some of the smart
set had them; for even Deerwood was divided into sets. There was the
smart set—the intellectual set—the old-family set—of which the
Stirlings were members—the common run, and a few pariahs. Not one of
the Stirling clan had as yet condescended to a motor, though Olive was
teasing her father to have one. Valancy had never even been in a
motorcar. But she did not hanker after this. In truth, she felt rather
terrible savage leap somewhere. On the steep mountain trails around her
Of course she must buy the tea in Uncle Benjamin’s grocery-store. To
Valancy, with Uncle Benjamin’s will in the background of her mind, said
“Because,” chuckled Uncle Benjamin, “they can’t decline matrimony.”
Valancy disliked them a little more than ever. On the first day Claude
Bertram had seen her in the store she had heard him whisper to Joe,
“Who is that?” And Joe had said, “Valancy Stirling—one of the Deerwood
evidently thinking the question very clever. Valancy smarted anew with
the sting of that old recollection.
dangerously near the second corner and not even thinking of getting
what to make of her. To cover his confusion, he asked another conundrum
as he tied up her beans—Cousin Stickles had remembered at the last
moment that they must have beans. Beans were cheap and filling.
her tea and her beans. For the moment she did not care whether Uncle
Benjamin cut her out of his will or not. She walked out of the store
Valancy was sorry by the time she reached the next crossing. Why had
would likely tell her mother that Doss had been impertinent—“to
_me_!”—and her mother would lecture her for a week.
twitted with her loverless condition. She remembered the bitter moment
the school playground while the other little girls of her class were
“Uncle Benjamin’s riddles hurt me because they are true. I _do_ want to
passed her at this moment, read her thoughts and disapproved of them
ever since the Sunday, twenty-three years before, when he had first
day and she had gone into the church timidly and sat in their pew. No
one else was in the church—nobody except the new rector, Dr. Stalling.
Dr. Stalling stood up in front of the choir door, beckoned to her, and
Valancy had stared around her. There was no little boy—there was no one
in all the huge church but herself. This strange man with the blue
Valancy arose as if hypnotised and walked up the aisle. She was too
Presently her mother came in.
course—it never occurred to her that one could disobey the rector—and
the church was full of people now. Oh, what would she do if that
people? Valancy sat through the whole service in an agony of dread and
be caught by him on the street corner, thinking such things!
mother—afraid of facing gruff, shaggy-browed old Dr. Trent, who would
Pills instead. Redfern’s Purple Pills were the standard medicine of the
Stirling clan. Had they not cured Second Cousin Geraldine when five
the virtues of the Purple Pills; but there _might_ be something in
them; and it was easier to take them than to face Dr. Trent alone. She
would glance over the magazines in the reading-room a few minutes and
then go home.
was a picture of the heroine surrounded by adoring men. And here was
slammed the magazine shut; she opened _Magic of Wings_. Her eyes fell
on the paragraph that changed her life.
“_Fear is the original sin_,” wrote John Foster. “_Almost all the evil
in the world has its origin in the fact that some one is afraid of
breath for a moment. Was the trouble serious? Oh, it couldn’t be,
surely—it really hadn’t bothered her _much_—only lately it had got a
Dr. Trent opened his mouth—but before he could speak the telephone at
his elbow rang sharply. He picked up the receiver. Valancy, watching
Dr. Trent dropped the receiver, dashed out of the room and upstairs
hand, snatched his hat and coat from the rack, jerked open the street
door and rushed down the street in the direction of the station.
Valancy sat alone in the little office, feeling more absolutely foolish
relative and non-existent as a sweetheart or friend, but she was not
presence in his excitement over whatever message had come by the
the face of family tradition.
so—ridiculous. Then she heard Dr. Trent’s housekeeper coming down the
stairs. Valancy rose and went to the office door.
“Well, that’s too bad,” said Mrs. Patterson sympathetically. “But it
wasn’t much wonder, poor man. That was a telegram they ’phoned over
from the Port. His son has been terribly injured in an auto accident in
Montreal. The doctor had just ten minutes to catch the train. I don’t
know what he’ll do if anything happens to Ned—he’s just bound up in the
moment. Nevertheless, she felt very flat and discouraged as she went
down the street.
Valancy went home by the short-cut of Lover’s Lane. She did not often
would never do to be late. Lover’s Lane wound back of the village,
there at any time and not find some canoodling couple—or young girls in
pairs, arms intertwined, earnestly talking over their little secrets.
in new pink organdy dresses with flowers stuck coquettishly in their
along, oblivious to everything but themselves. The young man’s arm was
around the girl’s waist quite shamelessly. Valancy had never walked
with a man’s arm about her. She felt that she ought to be shocked—they
might leave that sort of thing for the screening twilight, at least—but
she wasn’t shocked. In another flash of desperate, stark honesty she
owned to herself that she was merely envious. When she passed them she
felt quite sure they were laughing at her—pitying her—“there’s that
Just where Lover’s Lane debouched on the street, an old car was parked.
knew it. This was before the phrase “tin Lizzie” had come into
was the tinniest of Lizzies—though it was not a Ford but an old Grey
swift, furtive look as she hurried by. This was only the second time
she had ever seen the notorious Barney Snaith, though she had heard
enough about him in the five years that he had been living “up back” in
Muskoka. The first time had been nearly a year ago, on the Muskoka
road. He had been crawling out from under his car then, too, and he had
gave him the look of an amused gnome. He didn’t look bad—she didn’t
believe he was bad, in spite of the wild yarns that were always being
bed—often with old “Roaring Abel,” who made the night hideous with his
howls—“both of them dead drunk, my dear.” And every one knew that he
and the father of Roaring Abel’s illegitimate grandchild and a
counterfeiter and a forger and a few other awful things. But still
It was that night the Prince of the Blue Castle changed from a being of
about the jaw.
bare to the shoulders, were black with grease. But he was whistling
rackety old Grey Slosson. Neither he nor his car had to be respectable
longish hair blowing in the wind, a villainous-looking old black pipe
in his mouth, she envied him again. Men had the best of it, no doubt
Valancy Stirling, respectable, well-behaved to the last degree, was
unhappy and had always been unhappy. So there you were.
dismal, drizzling rain was falling again. Cousin Stickles had the
neuralgia. Valancy had to do the family darning and there was no time
“Can’t the darning wait till tomorrow?” she pleaded.
Valancy darned all the evening and listened to Mrs. Frederick and
Cousin Stickles talking the eternal, niggling gossip of the clan, as
they knitted drearily at interminable black stockings. They discussed
Second Cousin Lilian’s approaching wedding in all its bearings. On the
whole, they approved. Second Cousin Lilian was doing well for herself.
Valancy flinched. She had run the darning needle into her finger.
Mrs. Frederick. “I would never have a cat about the house.”
harbouring the unlawful desire in her heart of hearts.
Once Valancy sneezed. Now, in the Stirling code, it was very bad form
Liniment. Valancy did that. Valancy always had to do it. She hated the
smell of Redfern’s Liniment—she hated the smug, beaming, portly,
be-whiskered, be-spectacled picture of Dr. Redfern on the bottle. Her
fingers smelled of the horrible stuff after she got into bed, in spite
of all the scrubbing she gave them.
There was a rosebush on the little Stirling lawn, growing beside the
roses. But—of course—the rosebush never bloomed. That was her luck.
Valancy did everything she could think of and took the advice of
everybody in the clan, but still the rosebush would not bloom. It
overwhelming hatred for it. The thing wouldn’t bloom: very well, then,
she would cut it down. She marched to the tool-room in the barn for her
garden knife and she went at the rosebush viciously. A few minutes
later horrified Mrs. Frederick came out to the verandah and beheld her
daughter slashing insanely among the rosebush boughs. Half of them were
already strewn on the walk. The bush looked sadly dismantled.
“Don’t argue with _me_, Doss. Clear up that mess and leave the bush
“I only said the bush was mine,” repeated Valancy humbly.
Mrs. Frederick turned without a word and marched back into the house.
The mischief was done now. Valancy knew she had offended her mother
Frederick would preserve the stony silence of outraged majesty.
its precise nail in the tool-shop. She cleared away the severed
branches and swept up the leaves. Her lips twitched as she looked at
the straggling bush. It had an odd resemblance to its shaken, scrawny
But she did not feel repentant—only sorry she had offended her mother.
was one of those women who can make their anger felt all over a house.
“You’d better go uptown and git the mail,” said Cousin Stickles, when
spring. I want you to stop at the drugstore and git me a bottle of
building a body up. Cousin James says the Purple Pills are the best,
to the day he died. Don’t let them charge you more’n ninety cents. I
kin git it for that at the Port. And what _have_ you been saying to
your poor mother? Do you ever stop to think, Doss, that you kin only
have one mother?”
She got Cousin Stickles’ bottle of bitters and then she went to the
post-office and asked for her mail at the General Delivery. Her mother
did not have a box. They got too little mail to bother with it. Valancy
did not expect any mail, except the _Christian Times_, which was the
only paper they took. They hardly ever got any letters. But Valancy
rather liked to stand in the office and watch Mr. Carewe, the
grey-bearded, Santa-Clausy old clerk, handing out letters to the lucky
people who did get them. He did it with such a detached, impersonal,
Jove-like air, as if it did not matter in the least to him what
supernal joys or shattering horrors might be in those letters for the
people to whom they were addressed. Letters had a fascination for
Stirling, Elm Street, Deerwood”—and the postmark was Montreal. Valancy
the letter was safely in her bag.
“What,” said Uncle Benjamin, “is the difference between a donkey and a
“One you lick with a stick and the other you stick with a lick. Ha,
Cousin Stickles pounced on the _Times_ when Valancy got home, but it
did not occur to her to ask if there were any letters. Mrs. Frederick
Valancy was glad of this. If her mother had asked if there were any
letters Valancy would have had to admit there was. Then she would have
had to let her mother and Cousin Stickles read the letter and all would
Her heart acted strangely on the way upstairs, and she sat down by her
her mother. Every letter she had ever written or received had been read
too, perhaps, with apprehension. She felt quite sure there was nothing
words. Dr. Trent never beat about the bush. “Dear Miss Sterling”—and
then a page of black, positive writing. Valancy seemed to read it at a
aneurism—whatever that was—and in the last stages. He said, without
She was to get the prescription he enclosed filled and carry it with
in the light of a spring afternoon—skies entrancingly blue, winds
perfumed and free, lovely, soft, blue hazes at the end of every street.
Over at the railway station a group of young girls was waiting for a
train; she heard their gay laughter as they chattered and joked. The
train roared in and roared out again. But none of these things had any
reality. Nothing had any reality except the fact that she had only
another year to live.
When she was tired of sitting at the window she went over and lay down
on her bed, staring at the cracked, discoloured ceiling. The curious
was the conviction that Dr. Trent knew his business and that she,
When the gong rang for supper Valancy got up and went downstairs
alone so long. But of course her mother would not pay any attention to
her just now. Valancy was thankful for this. She thought the quarrel
over the rosebush had been really, as Mrs. Frederick herself might have
over her mother’s attitude, and her lack of appetite was not commented
on. Valancy forced herself to swallow a cup of tea and then sat and
watched the others eat, with an odd feeling that years had passed since
she had sat with them at the dinner-table. She found herself smiling
merely tell them what was in Dr. Trent’s letter and there would be as
much fuss made as if—Valancy thought bitterly—they really cared two
Stickles, so suddenly that Valancy jumped guiltily. Was there anything
“You ain’t in the habit of having headaches. I hope you’re not taking
the mumps. Here, try a spoonful of vinegar.”
“Piffle!” said Valancy rudely, getting up from the table. She did not
care just then if she were rude. She had had to be so polite all her
I’ll come up and rub your forehead and the back of your neck with
Valancy had reached the door, but she turned. “I won’t be rubbed with
Valancy. “Horrid, sticky stuff! And it has the vilest smell of any
Mrs. Frederick went on eating her supper. It did not matter whether
Valancy did not sleep that night. She lay awake all through the long
of death. It did not seem in the least terrible to her. And she need
Because of life. Afraid of Uncle Benjamin because of the menace of
old maid very long. Afraid of offending her mother and her clan because
she had to live with and among them and couldn’t live peaceably if she
didn’t give in to them. But now she hadn’t. Valancy felt a curious
But she was still horribly afraid of one thing—the fuss the whole
jamfry of them would make when she told them. Valancy shuddered at the
would be. First there would be indignation—yes, indignation on the part
consulting HIM. Indignation on the part of her mother for being so sly
and deceitful—“to your own mother, Doss.” Indignation on the part of
the whole clan because she had not gone to Dr. Marsh.
Then would come the solicitude. She would be taken to Dr. Marsh, and
specialists in Toronto and Montreal. Uncle Benjamin would foot the bill
with a splendid gesture of munificence in thus assisting the widow and
orphan, and talk forever after of the shocking fees specialists charged
for looking wise and saying they couldn’t do anything. And when the
taking Purple Pills—“I’ve known them to effect a cure when _all_ the
doctors had given up”—and her mother would insist on Redfern’s Blood
Bitters, and Cousin Stickles would insist on rubbing her over the heart
every night with Redfern’s Liniment on the grounds that it _might_ do
as if he were going to shake his forefinger at her, the forefinger that
lest she die in her sleep. Cousin Stickles or her mother would insist
on sharing her room and bed. Yes, undoubtedly they would.
up with it and she wouldn’t. As the clock in the hall below struck
would hide them with a vengeance.
to die when she had never lived. Rebellion flamed up in her soul as the
could see her own obituary notice in the Deerwood _Weekly Times_,
copied into the Port Lawrence _Journal_. “A deep gloom was cast over
death would not matter a straw to anybody. Not even her mother loved
her—her mother who had been so disappointed that she was not a boy—or
Valancy reviewed her whole life between midnight and the early spring
dawn. It was a very drab existence, but here and there an incident
importance. These incidents were all unpleasant in one way or another.
once that there is an hour in which a woman might be happy all her life
when, at sixteen, she had blued a tubful of clothes too deeply. And the
Wellington’s pantry. Valancy never heard the last of those two
misdemeanours. At almost every clan gathering they were raked up
against her as jokes. Uncle Benjamin hardly ever missed re-telling the
raspberry jam incident—he had been the one to catch her, her face all
“I have really done so few bad things that they have to keep harping on
the old ones,” thought Valancy. “Why, I’ve never even had a quarrel
There was that incident of the dust-pile at school when she was seven.
Valancy always recalled it when Dr. Stalling referred to the text, “To
even that which he hath.” Other people might puzzle over that text but
Olive, dating from the day of the dust-pile, was a commentary on it.
had just begun and had about her all the glamour of “a new girl” and an
exceedingly pretty girl at that. It was at recess and all the girls,
big and little, were out on the road in front of the school making
dust-piles. The aim of each girl was to have the biggest pile. Valancy
was good at making dust-piles—there was an art in it—and she had secret
the older girls had an inspiration.
A frenzy seemed to seize the girls. They swooped down on the dust-piles
resolutely and began building another dust-pile. Again a bigger girl
“But _why_?” demanded the older girl. “Why won’t you help to build
Her plea went unheeded. While she argued with one girl another scraped
“Jealous—you’re jealous!” said the girls mockingly.
“You were very selfish,” said her mother coldly, when Valancy told her
about it at night. That was the first and last time Valancy had ever
taken any of her troubles to her mother.
Valancy was neither jealous nor selfish. It was only that she wanted a
down the street—Olive’s dust pile was scattered over the roadway—the
bell rang—the girls trooped into school and had forgotten the whole
affair before they reached their seats. Valancy never forgot it. To
The enormous red moon she had seen rising right at the end of the
with the awful, uncanny horror of it. So near to her. So big. She had
run in trembling to her mother and her mother had laughed at her. She
had gone to bed and hidden her face under the clothes in terror lest
she might look at the window and see that horrible moon glaring in at
had not let him—she had evaded him and run. He was the only boy who had
hadn’t done. Olive had said that Valancy had pushed her into the mud
That summer when Olive had the most beautiful hat, trimmed with creamy
yellow net, with a wreath of red roses and little ribbon bows under the
her ears. None of the girls would go around with her because she was so
“I was an excellent foil for her,” thought Valancy. “Even then she knew
ten. Byron Stirling was there; from Montreal, twelve years old,
conceited, clever. At family prayers in the morning Byron had reached
Byron denied it. He said she cried out because the kitten scratched
her. He said she had put the kitten up on her chair and was playing
was _believed_. In the Stirling clan the boys were always believed
before the girls. Valancy was sent home in disgrace because of her
the fact that Betty was going to ask her to be one of her bridesmaids.
that Valancy was too insignificant—she would “spoil the effect.” That
was nine years ago. But tonight Valancy caught her breath with the old
That day in her eleventh year when her mother had badgered her into
guilty. Mrs. Frederick was always making people lie by pushing them
into situations where they _had_ to lie. Then her mother had made her
kneel down on the parlour floor, between herself and Cousin Stickles,
and say, “O God, please forgive me for not speaking the truth.” Valancy
_you_ know I did speak the truth.” Valancy had not then heard of
The affair of the button-string, when she was ten. All the girls in
beautiful buttons. Valancy had one. Most of the buttons on it were very
commonplace, but she had six beauties that had come off Grandmother
the exclusive possession of those beautiful buttons. When Olive saw
them on the button-string she had looked at them narrowly but said
nothing—then. The next day Aunt Wellington had come to Elm Street and
buttons—Grandmother Stirling was just as much Wellington’s mother as
fall out with Aunt Wellington. Moreover, the matter was of no
importance whatever. Aunt Wellington carried off four of the buttons,
generously leaving two for Valancy. Valancy had torn these from her
string and flung them on the floor—she had not yet learned that it was
unladylike to have feelings—and had been sent supperless to bed for the
The night of Margaret Blunt’s party. She had made such pathetic efforts
to be pretty that night. Rob Walker was to be there; and two nights
before, on the moonlit verandah of Uncle Herbert’s cottage at Mistawis,
Valancy its humiliation and disappointment were of the other day. Her
face burned in the darkness as she recalled herself, sitting there with
her pitifully crimped, thin hair and the cheeks she had pinched for an
hour before coming, in an effort to make them red. All that came of it
the great emotions of life have passed me by. I’ve never even had a
grief. And have I ever really loved anybody? Do I really love Mother?
No, I don’t. That’s the truth, whether it is disgraceful or not. I
ejaculated the last “nothing” aloud passionately. Then she moaned and
When it was over something had happened to Valancy—perhaps the
culmination of the process that had been going on in her mind ever
since she had read Dr. Trent’s letter. It was three o’clock in the
morning—the wisest and most accursed hour of the clock. But sometimes
“I’ve been trying to please other people all my life and failed,” she
again. I’ve breathed an atmosphere of fibs and pretences and evasions
all my life. What a luxury it will be to tell the truth! I may not be
able to do much that I want to do but I won’t do another thing that I
don’t want to do. Mother can pout for weeks—I shan’t worry over it.
freedom. When she had finished with her hair she opened the window and
hurled the jar of potpourri over into the next lot. It smashed
gloriously against the schoolgirl complexion on the old carriage-shop.
“I’m sick of the fragrance of dead things,” said Valancy.
to among the Stirlings during the following weeks as “the time we first
Not for worlds would any of the Stirlings have said out and out at
and was only excused because of the outrageousness of Valancy’s conduct
at the aforesaid wedding dinner.
made them uneasy _before_ the dinner. It had begun with the rosebush,
not seem to worry in the least over the fact that her mother was not
flatly refused to take either Purple Pills or Redfern’s Bitters. She
had announced coolly that she did not intend to answer to the name of
it. She had moved her bed in her room to the opposite corner. She had
sliding down the bannister. Cousin Stickles did not tell Mrs. Frederick
announcement on Saturday night that she was not going to go to the
“Oh, I’m going to church,” said Valancy airily. “I’m going to the
Presbyterian church. But to the Anglican church I will not go.”
“What have you got against the Anglican church?” she sobbed.
“Nothing—only just that you’ve always made me go there. If you’d made
me go to the Presbyterian church I’d want to go to the Anglican.”
“Is that a nice thing to say to your mother? Oh, how true it is that it
So Valancy’s behaviour at the silver wedding was not quite the surprise
to Mrs. Frederick and Christine Stickles that it was to the rest. They
were doubtful about the wisdom of taking her, but concluded it would
“make talk” if they didn’t. Perhaps she would behave herself, and so
far no outsider suspected there was anything queer about her. By a
Valancy had not carried out her hideous threat of going to the
Valancy would not have cared in the least if they had left her at home.
These family celebrations were all hopelessly dull. But the Stirlings
these entertainments because they had to pinch and save and contrive
for weeks afterwards to pay for them. But she wanted to go to the
away, and she rather liked Uncle Herbert. Besides, she wanted to look
As if there were anything else to put on! Valancy had only the one
become her. When she was young they allowed her to wear white, but that
had been tacitly dropped for some years. Valancy put on the brown silk.
low neck and elbow sleeves, although they had been worn, even in
became her—only the little knot was so absurdly small. Mrs. Frederick
resented the hair but decided it was wisest to say nothing on the eve
of the party. It was so important that Valancy should be kept in good
that this was the first time in her life that she had thought it
necessary to consider Valancy’s humours. But then Valancy had never
On their way to Uncle Herbert’s—Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles
drove past them. Drunk as usual but not in the roaring stage. Just
tartan cap with the air of a monarch saluting his subjects and swept
them a grand bow. Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles dared not cut
Roaring Abel altogether. He was the only person in Deerwood who could
be got to do odd jobs of carpentering and repairing when they needed to
be done, so it would not do to offend him. But they responded with only
the stiffest, slightest of bows. Roaring Abel must be kept in his
Valancy, behind them, did a thing they were fortunately spared seeing.
always liked the old sinner. He was such a jolly, picturesque,
unashamed reprobate and stood out against the drab respectability of
Only a few nights ago Abel had gone through Deerwood in the wee sma’s,
shouting oaths at the top of his stentorian voice which could be heard
the breakfast-table.
“I cannot understand why the judgment of the Lord has not fallen upon
the poverty and drudgery and monotony of his existence. _She_ went on
By this time they had reached Maple Avenue and Uncle Herbert’s house, a
attempt to avert disaster. She held Valancy back on the landing as
“Oh, if there were only any hope of being able to forget it!” said
her head bent a perceptible time after all the rest had been lifted.
that moment that there was something wrong with Valancy. In those
entirely _right_ with eyes like that”—there was an odd gleam of mockery
had no parlour tricks. And she had been in the habit of taking refuge
from the boredom of family parties in her Blue Castle, which resulted
and for all. Nobody dreamed that Valancy was dumb in their presence
merely because she was afraid of them. Now she was no longer afraid of
them. The shackles had been stricken off her soul. She was quite
herself go with a wild, inner exultation, as Uncle Herbert carved the
did not seem even to be aware of him. She was gazing around the table,
sensible people and watching their little squirms with a detached,
So these were the people she had always held in reverence and fear. She
seemed to see them with new eyes.
the cleverest woman in the clan, her husband a little lower than the
through teething at eleven months? And could she not tell you the best
called neuritis. It jumped about from one part of her body to another.
Aunt Isabel. Valancy counted her chins. Aunt Isabel was the critic of
the clan. She had always gone about squashing people flat. More members
who was noted for the variety of her pickle recipes and for nothing
the advertisement picture of a corset and had put a dress on her Venus
happen to _it_. But while there was life there was fear.
controversial letters to the _Christian Times_, attacking Modernism.
killed her—quite legally. She had been smothered and starved.
Uncle Benjamin, wheezy, pussy-mouthed. With great pouches under eyes
Uncle Wellington. Long, pallid face, thin, pale-yellow hair—“one of the
thought was a wicked evasion of the purposes of God.
didn’t want. Valancy let them off easily in her judgment because she
liked them, even if they were in Milton’s expressive phrase, “stupidly
above the elbow.
Then she looked across the table at Olive. Olive, who had been held up
Valancy’s elfin eyes lost their mocking glitter and became pensive and
might show her fine, white, regular teeth rather too lavishly when she
gown; great pearl bubbles in her ears; the blue-white diamond flame on
suddenly thankful that her own scrawny arms were decently swathed in
way,” thought Valancy, in a recurring spasm of bitterness at the fate
have thought that there was at least ten years between them. But nobody
and Uncle Wellington disapproved of that and in the end Olive dutifully
gave him up. Nobody in the Stirling clan—whatever outsiders might
approval. Cecil Price was clever and handsome and “one of the Port
just graduated in civil engineering and they were to be married as soon
lace. Valancy knew also—though Olive had not told her—that the
bridesmaids were selected and that she was not among them.
because she was the only girl in the connection who could not bore
Olive with return confidences. Olive always told Valancy all the
details of her love affairs, from the days when the little boys in
comfort herself by thinking these affairs mythical. Olive really had
them. Many men had gone mad over her besides the three fortunate ones.
“I don’t know what the poor idiots see in me, that drives them to make
such double idiots of themselves,” Olive was wont to say. Valancy would
have liked to say, “I don’t either,” but truth and diplomacy both
of the girls about whom men do go mad just as indubitably as she,
Valancy, was one of the girls at whom no man ever looked twice.
Meanwhile the dinner in its earlier stages was dragging its slow length
along true to Stirling form. The room was chilly, in spite of the
calendar, and Aunt Alberta had the gas-logs lighted. Everybody in the
committed the sacrilege of a gas-log. Uncle Herbert made his hardy
perennial joke when he helped Aunt Wellington to the cold meat—“Mary,
will you have a little lamb?” Aunt Mildred told the same old story of
sufferings with an ulcerating tooth. Aunt Wellington admired the
pattern of Aunt Alberta’s silver teaspoons and lamented the fact that
“It spoiled the set. I could never get it matched. And it was my
Aunt Isabel thought the seasons were changing and couldn’t imagine what
usual, discussed the last funeral and wondered, audibly, “which of us
will be the next to pass away.” Cousin Georgiana could never say
nephews had nipped all the buds off her house-plants and chivied her
brood of fancy chickens—“squeezed some of them actually to death, my
“But they needn’t be ramping, rampageous animals,” retorted Cousin
Gladys, looking round the table for appreciation of her wit. Everybody
Uncle James thought the conversation was sagging to a rather low plane
discussion on “the greatest happiness.” Everybody was asked to state
his or her idea of “the greatest happiness.”
Aunt Mildred thought the greatest happiness—for a woman—was to be “a
loving and beloved wife and mother.” Aunt Wellington thought it would
Georgiana’s greatest happiness would be “to have her dear, dead brother
Richard back.” Aunt Alberta remarked vaguely that the greatest
happiness was to be found in “the poetry of life” and hastily gave some
Mrs. Frederick said the greatest happiness was to spend your life in
loving service for others, and Cousin Stickles and Aunt Isabel agreed
Frederick had taken the wind out of her sails by saying it first. “We
other women all felt rebuked for their low ideals, and Uncle James had
a conviction that the conversation had been uplifted with a vengeance.
breathing easier since the dinner had progressed so far without any
outbreak on the part of Valancy, began to tremble again. But she deemed
it the part of prudence to say nothing. Uncle Benjamin was not so
“Doss,” he chuckled, “what is the difference between a young girl and
“One is happy and careless and the other is cappy and hairless,” said
all people! He looked feebly around the table to see what the others
thought of it. Everybody was looking rather blank. Poor Mrs. Frederick
if nothing out of the usual had occurred.
had bitten her recently. Uncle James, to back her up, asked where the
“Just a little below the Catholic church,” said Aunt Alberta.
At that point Valancy laughed. Nobody else laughed. What was there to
where you’ll find a beauty parlor in Port Lawrence where they can
reduce the number of your chins.”
“So there is that advantage, at least, in being twenty-nine,” said
“Oh, but you know we’re all dead,” said Valancy, “the whole Stirling
clan. Some of us are buried and some aren’t—yet. That is the only
remember the time you stole the raspberry jam?”
Isabel’s profile on the wall. Did you ever see anything so funny?”
right. I’m going to keep right on eating. It’s so seldom I get the
It was the first time any one had been called “old dear” in Deerwood.
The Stirlings thought Valancy had invented the phrase and they were
such an expression. But in poor Mrs. Frederick’s opinion the reference
to a satisfying meal was the worst thing Valancy had said yet. Valancy
thought she would have to get up and go away from the table. Yet she
dared not leave Valancy there.
Aunt Alberta’s maid came in to remove the salad plates and bring in the
determination to ignore Valancy and talk as if she wasn’t there. Uncle
herself to listen. There was a subtle fascination in the subject for
Of course they abused him. Nobody ever had a good word to say of Barney
Snaith. All the old, wild tales were canvassed—the defaulting
allowed to exist at all in the neighbourhood of Deerwood. He didn’t
know what the police at Port Lawrence were thinking of. Everybody would
be murdered in their beds some night. It was a shame that he should be
proof. When a man hides himself up there on an island in Muskoka, year
lives, or what he does there, _that’s_ proof enough. Find a mystery and
the name itself is enough to condemn him!”
“Just for the fun of it?” suggested Valancy.
“Exactly,” said Cousin Georgiana unsuspiciously. “When there is so much
smoke there must be some fire. I was afraid he was a criminal when he
doubts it”—glaring at Valancy. “Why, they say he served a term in the
penitentiary for embezzlement. I don’t doubt it. And they say he’s in
with that gang that are perpetrating all those bank robberies round the
this confounded girl, anyway? He ignored the question.
“He has the identical look of a jail-bird,” snapped Uncle Benjamin. “I
noticed it the first time I saw him.”
“‘A fellow by the hand of nature marked,
the chance.
“One of his eyebrows is an arch and the other is a triangle,” said
his eyebrows the world came to an end. This time it continued to
composedly. “I thought his face the most interesting one I ever saw.”
“There is no doubt there is something fishy in the creature’s past
life,” said Olive, who began to think she was decidedly out of the
Cats. It sounded quite alluring to Valancy, in the plural. She pictured
“That alone shows there is something wrong with him,” decreed Aunt
a relish, “always seem to think that there is some peculiar virtue in
not liking them.”
Uncle Wellington’s rather lame conclusion was due to a marital glance
there were girls at the table.
“If you mean,” said Valancy passionately, “that Barney Snaith is the
father of Cecily Gay’s child, he _isn’t_. It’s a wicked lie.”
In spite of her indignation Valancy was hugely amused at the expression
of the faces around that festal table. She had not seen anything like
it since the day, seventeen years ago, when at Cousin Gladys’ thimble
party, they discovered that she had got—SOMETHING—in her head at
of them all, did it seem most intolerable that he should have been
intolerable to her. She did not mind when they called him a thief and a
had loved and ruined Cecily Gay. She recalled his face on the two
occasions of their chance meetings—his twisted, enigmatic, engaging
she did, God or the Devil has punished her enough for it. _You_ needn’t
take a hand, too. As for Barney Snaith, the only crime he has been
they were and not one of them was fit to mend another.
“Valancy, your poor father would turn over in his grave if he could
“Doss,” said Uncle James heavily, “the Ten Commandments are fairly up
to date still—especially the fifth. Have you forgotten that?”
“No,” said Valancy, “but I thought _you_ had—especially the ninth. Have
you ever thought, Uncle James, how dull life would be without the Ten
Commandments? It is only when things are forbidden that they become
It must not find her there. She rose from her chair.
“I am going home now. I only came for the dinner. It was very good,
None of the flabbergasted silver wedding guests could think of anything
to say until the lawn gate clanged behind Valancy in the dusk. Then—
all there is about it. Clean dippy.”
like to be the one to administer it. H-uh-h-h-h!” Uncle Benjamin gulped
down the half of a scalding cup of coffee.
“Do you suppose that the mumps could work on a person that way?” wailed
“I opened an umbrella in the house yesterday,” sniffed Cousin
“She wouldn’t let Amelia put the thermometer under her tongue,”
aren’t there?”
“And she’s determined to go to the Presbyterian church,” said Cousin
Stickles—repressing, however, to her credit be it said, the story of
the bannister.
strange about her the minute she came in today. I noticed it _before_
part?’ Was there any sense at all in that remark? None whatever! There
never was anything like that in the Stirlings. It must be from the
“I never heard of anything like that in the Wansbarras,” she sobbed.
“Your father was odd enough,” said Uncle Benjamin.
Benjamin. “And he believed he was his own great-great grandfather born
“Well, fortunately there’s no outsider here,” snapped Uncle Benjamin.
“We may keep it in the family yet. I’ll take her over to see Dr. Marsh
“Well, that’s settled. In the meantime, Amelia, act as if nothing had
sweep the parlour yesterday morning, though we _always_ sweep it on
Thursdays. She said she’d wait till it was dirty. ‘Would you rather
course. I’d see something for my labour then.’ Think of it!”
disappeared from her room. I found the pieces in the next lot. She
“The only thing you can be sure of in this world is the multiplication
wasn’t there to ask it.
Olive, too. But then, he was a man.
Uncle Herbert was thinking that things were rather dull now that Doss
Valancy hurried home through the faint blue twilight—hurried too fast
perhaps. The attack she had when she thankfully reached the shelter of
her own room was the worst yet. It was really very bad. She might die
fussy and alarmed. Not her mother or Cousin Stickles. Why did the
in the midst of this hideous loneliness of pain, that _he_ would be
sympathetic—sorry for any one that was suffering? Why did he seem to
had all been so simple. She had merely _said_ the things she had always
_thought_. Their faces—oh, their faces! Uncle Benjamin—poor,
hoard. Olive had always got Valancy’s share of everything. Remember the
To laugh at her clan as she had always wanted to laugh was all the
rather pitiful that it should be so. Might she not pity herself a
the caress of a wise, tender, old friend. The lombardies in Mrs.
Tredgold’s lawn, off to the left—Valancy could just see them between
the stable and the old carriage-shop—were in dark purple silhouette
against a clear sky and there was a milk-white, pulsating star just
over one of them, like a living pearl on a silver-green lake. Far
beyond the station were the shadowy, purple-hooded woods around Lake
Mistawis. A white, filmy mist hung over them and just above it was a
“Why on earth should I go to Dr. Marsh? There’s nothing the matter with
haven’t. I’ve simply grown tired of living to please other people and
besides my stealing the raspberry jam. So that’s that.”
“Who am I like, then?” asked Valancy.
Uncle Benjamin was rather posed.
“Your Grandfather Wansbarra,” he answered desperately.
Grandfather Wansbarra. He was one of the few human beings I _have_
known—almost the only one. Now, it is of no use to scold or entreat or
command, Uncle Benjamin—or exchange anguished glances with Mother and
doctorwards by physical force. And in no other way could it be done,
seemingly. Her mother’s tears and imploring entreaties availed not.
“Don’t worry, Mother,” said Valancy, lightly but quite respectfully.
“Fun!” Mrs. Frederick uttered the word as if Valancy had said she was
Olive, sent by her mother to see if _she_ had any influence over
mother that nothing could be done with Valancy. After _she_, Olive, had
“More as if she were talking to herself than to me. Indeed, Mother, all
the time I was talking to her she gave me the impression of not really
week, not to say anything queer before him, at least. Mother, what do
“She said, ‘I’d rather like to shock Cecil. His mouth is too red for a
man’s.’ Mother, I can never feel the same to Valancy again.”
Another solemn family conclave was held. They were all there except
responsibility. They decided—that is, they accepted a fact that was
thrust in their faces—that the wisest thing was to leave Valancy alone
“watchful waiting” had not been invented then, but that was practically
the policy Valancy’s distracted relatives decided to follow.
is”—solemnly—“easier to scramble eggs than unscramble them. Of
their decision. He pointed out to irate Uncle James—who would have
times. But then he himself was not a Stirling. And he knew very little
about the old Valancy. Uncle James stalked out and drove back to
way, had long ago appointed the second week in June for the repairing
of the front porch, the roof of which was sagging dangerously. Roaring
promptly appeared on the morning of the first day of the second week,
anything but drunk. But he was only in the first stage, which made him
his vivid, eloquent talk, and after she washed the dinner dishes she
went out and sat on the steps and talked to him.
but what could they do? Valancy only smiled mockingly at them when they
started. The first step was the only one that really counted. They were
before Roaring Abel, who would spread it all over the country with his
in spite of the June sunshine, for Mrs. Frederick to sit at the
dining-room window and listen to what was said. She had to shut the
window and Valancy and Roaring Abel had their talk to themselves. But
if Mrs. Frederick had known what the outcome of that talk was to be she
would have prevented it, if the porch was never repaired.
Valancy sat on the steps, defiant of the chill breeze of this cold June
which had made Aunt Isabel aver the seasons were changing. She did not
care whether she caught a cold or not. It was delightful to sit there
lungs with the clean, lovely wind and held out her arms to it and let
fell true to the note.
been, but wasn’t. It was a fine, upstanding, aquiline nose, such as the
noblest Roman of them all might have rejoiced in. Abel was six feet two
insisted on repeating the fifty-fifth chapter of Isaiah—Abel knew most
of the Bible and all the Psalms by heart—while the minister, whom he
Valancy had known “Cissy Gay” fairly well in the democracy of the
After they left school their paths diverged and she had seen nothing of
more about Presbyterian theology than most ministers, which made him a
terror to them in arguments. But Roaring Abel never went to church.
not sought out Roaring Abel since the first three months of his
pastorate. He had called on Roaring Abel then and found him in the
theological stage of drunkenness—which always followed the sentimental
maudlin one, and preceded the roaring, blasphemous one. The eloquently
as a sinner in the hands of an angry God, was the final one. Abel never
Abel had seen that Cissy was properly baptised—jovially drunk at the
of the Mission Band, the Girls’ Guild and the Young Women’s Missionary
then liking and pity did not prevent them from tearing her in pieces
like hungry cats when the catastrophe came. Four years previously Cissy
had come back in the fall she was a changed creature. She hid herself
That winter Cissy’s baby was born. Nobody ever knew who the father was.
surmise laid the guilt at Barney Snaith’s door because diligent inquiry
among the other maids at the hotel revealed the fact that nobody there
herself” they said, rather resentfully. “Too good for _our_ dances. And
once, when he knew Abel was away, but the dreadful old creature who was
scrubbing the kitchen floor told him Cissy wouldn’t see any one. The
housekeepers—the only kind who could be prevailed on to go to a house
where a girl was dying of consumption. But the last one had left and
the burden of his plaint to Valancy and he condemned the “hypocrites”
that happened to reach Cousin Stickles’ ears as she passed through the
hall and nearly finished the poor lady. Was Valancy listening to
Valancy hardly noticed the profanity. Her attention was focussed on the
helpless in that forlorn old house out on the Mistawis road, without a
community in the year of grace nineteen and some odd!
“Do you mean to say that Cissy is all alone there now, with nobody to
has to eat his peck before he dies—but she went over the limit. What
the table in glass jars with the tops off. The dawg got up on the table
and stuck his paw into one of them. What did she do? She jest took holt
of the dawg and wrung the syrup off his paw back into the jar! Then
screwed the top on and set it in the pantry. I sets open the door and
says to her, ‘Go!’ The dame went, and I fired the jars of punkin after
them punkin jars raining after her. She’s told everywhere I’m crazy, so
whose mind was centred on this aspect of the case. She did not care
whether Roaring Abel had any one to cook for him or not. But her heart
parcel of St. Andrew’s people wouldn’t be seen on the same side of the
road with him. Their dogs’ll go to heaven before they do. And their
minister—slick as if the cat had licked him!”
I’d get all the housekeepers I’d want. I’d be respectable then. But
what’s the use of going to church when it’s all settled by
“Yes. Can’t git around it nohow. Wish I could. I don’t want either
“Isn’t that the way it is in this world?” said Valancy
thoughtfully—but rather as if her thought was concerned with something
else than theology.
“No, I’ve another way of getting free,” said Valancy absently. “But
“What are you harping on Sis for? Seems to me you ain’t bothered much
“Why in the world did you let her go?” asked Uncle James.
“_Let_ her! How could I stop her, James? It seems she packed the big
supper, while Christine and I were out in the kitchen. Then Doss
thirty dollars a month.’ I wonder I didn’t drop dead on the spot.”
“You shouldn’t have let her go—you shouldn’t have let her out of the
house,” said Uncle James. “You should have locked the door—anything——”
“She was between me and the front door. And you can’t realise how
determined she was. She was like a rock. That’s the strangest thing of
neither to hold nor bind. But I said _everything_ I could think of to
James with the air of one making a splendid concession.
Mrs. Frederick wept. Cousin Stickles took up the refrain between her
control of the conversation.
“Insane people never _do_ have any regard for other people’s feelings,”
said Uncle Benjamin. “That’s one of the symptoms.”
“I broke out into tears then, and she said, ‘Come now, Mother, be a
good sport. I’m going to do an act of Christian charity, and as for the
“The last words I said to her,” said Cousin Stickles pathetically,
of smoothing things over now that the worst was out. But she had
_never_ told about the bannister.
“The worst feature of the case is that Snaith scoundrel is always
Valancy, not the flannel petticoat.
Valancy had walked out to Roaring Abel’s house on the Mistawis road
expectancy in her heart. Back there, behind her, her mother and Cousin
Stickles were crying—over themselves, not over her. But here the wind
was in her face, soft, dew-wet, cool, blowing along the grassy roads.
Oh, she loved the wind! The robins were whistling sleepily in the firs
along the way and the moist air was fragrant with the tang of balsam.
Big cars went purring past in the violet dusk—the stream of summer
their occupants. Muskoka cottages might be charming, but beyond, in the
sunset skies, among the spires of the firs, her Blue Castle towered.
She brushed the old years and habits and inhibitions away from her like
dead leaves. She would not be littered with them.
miles from the village, on the very edge of “up back,” as the sparsely
It had once been a snug place enough in the days when Abel Gay had been
young and prosperous, and the punning, arched sign over the gate—“A.
used to keep neat and pretty, had run wild. On two sides of the house
were fields full of nothing but mulleins. Behind the house was a long
and there a blossoming bit of wild cherry, running back to a belt of
timber on the shores of Lake Mistawis, two miles away. A rough, rocky,
boulder-strewn lane ran through it to the woods—a lane white with
Roaring Abel met Valancy at the door.
“And look at the nice ankles of her,” he added, as he stepped aside to
superannuated gallantry did not worry Valancy. Besides, this was the
nobody had ever mentioned it before. In the Stirling clan ankles were
among the unmentionables.
Roaring Abel took her into the kitchen, where Cissy Gay was lying on
the sofa, breathing quickly, with little scarlet spots on her hollow
She was shocked at the change in her. Could this be sweet Cissy—this
wept all the beauty out of her eyes; they looked too big—enormous—in
said Roaring Abel, complacently smoking his pipe in the corner.
years had separated her from her old life and all the people she had
as the days went on they seemed still more so, until they ceased to
matter altogether.
She was happy. Nobody ever bothered her with conundrums or insisted on
when she liked. In the long, wondrous, northern twilights, when Cissy
was asleep and Roaring Abel away, she could sit for hours on the shaky
back verandah steps, looking out over the barrens to the hills beyond,
covered with their fine, purple bloom, listening to the friendly wind
singing wild, sweet melodies in the little spruces, and drinking in the
aroma of the sunned grasses, until darkness flowed over the landscape
Sometimes of an afternoon, when Cissy was strong enough, the two girls
went into the barrens and looked at the wood-flowers. But they did not
pick any. Valancy had read to Cissy the gospel thereof according to
John Foster: “It is a pity to gather wood-flowers. They lose half their
witchery away from the green and the flicker. The way to enjoy
wood-flowers is to track them down to their remote haunts—gloat over
them—and then leave them with backward glances, taking with us only the
beguiling memory of their grace and fragrance.”
Valancy was in the midst of realities after a lifetime of unrealities.
Valancy been brought up in the Stirling habits of neatness and
her fill of it there. Roaring Abel thought she was foolish to bother
“Folks should always sing at their work,” he insisted. “Sounds
“There’s no getting the better of you. You’ve got an answer every time.
I should think the Stirlings would be glad to be rid of you. _They_
During the day Abel was generally away from home—if not working, then
nights—always very late and often very drunk. The first night they
heard him come howling into the yard, Cissy had told Valancy not to be
“Father never does anything—he just makes a noise.”
Valancy, lying on the sofa in Cissy’s room, where she had elected to
sleep, lest Cissy should need attention in the night—Cissy would never
have called her—was not at all afraid, and said so. By the time Abel
had got his horses put away, the roaring stage had passed and he was in
his room at the end of the hall crying and praying. Valancy could still
hear his dismal moans when she went calmly to sleep. For the most part,
“What is the use of getting in a rage?”
They both burst out laughing together.
that ain’t afraid to speak up to me. Sis there was always too meek—too
“All the same,” said Valancy determinedly, “there is no use in sending
tracking mud all over a floor I’ve just scrubbed. You _must_ use the
scraper whether you consign it to perdition or not.”
Cissy loved the cleanness and neatness. She had kept it so, too, until
Valancy with her. It had been so terrible—the long, lonely days and
work. Cissy had hated and feared them. She clung to Valancy like a
able to get up and dress—sometimes even to work about in the garden or
the barrens for an hour or two. For a few weeks after Valancy’s coming
work too hard. You don’t need to—Father only wants his meals cooked. I
course. But how I did wish it! You always seemed so different from the
other girls—so kind and sweet—and as if you had something in yourself
Valancy—then—who had destroyed her Blue Castle. But Valancy knew that,
though she had spoken to him only a few times. But then she had felt
just as well acquainted with him the first time they had met. She had
been in the garden at twilight, hunting for a few stalks of white
Slosson coming down through the woods from Mistawis—one could hear it
miles away. Valancy did not look up as it drew near, thumping over the
conscious that Barney had sprung from it and was leaning over the
violet—translucent and intense. Neither of his eyebrows looked like the
other. He was thin—too thin—she wished she could feed him up a bit—she
wished she could sew the buttons on his coat—and make him cut his
in his thin cheeks when he smiled. All these thoughts flashed through
said it. But Barney Snaith had a way of saying things that gave them
that some of the credit was yours. Valancy felt all this vaguely, but
“I’m going over to the Port,” Barney was saying. “Can I acquire merit
by getting or doing anything there for you or Cissy?”
“Will you get some salt codfish for us?” said Valancy. It was the only
the Blue Castle, Valancy had sent them on many a quest, but she had
never asked any of them to get her salt codfish.
“Certainly. You’re sure there’s nothing else? Lots of room in Lady Jane
“I don’t think there’s anything more,” said Valancy. She knew he would
come here and look after Cissy—under the circumstances.”
Snaith, someway—this terrible Barney Snaith of the lurid tales and
“All the money in the world couldn’t buy what you’re doing for Cissy
Gay,” said Barney. “It’s splendid and fine of you. And if there’s
“So do I. But there’s one stage of his drunkenness—perhaps you haven’t
sudden flake of pink on each cheek, born of the thought that Barney
For a moment Barney stared. Was this elfin girl the little, old-maidish
creature who had stood there two minutes ago? Surely there was magic
“It will be a relief to have some one to do it for you, then. So you
bring all the things I want.”
Barney had gone away, then, in his Lady Jane, and Valancy stood in the
Since then he had called several times, walking down through the
barrens, whistling. How that whistle of his echoed through the spruces
evening—rebuked herself—then let herself go. Why shouldn’t she listen
box of candy—the first box of candy she had ever been given. It seemed
back on the Mistawis island. Cissy had never seen it. Cissy, though she
“I don’t know. He’s a mystery. And of course there’s something behind
was surprisingly well read and could discuss any subject under the sun
and live and look like a tramp if there were not too good—or bad—a
like _that_ between them. Though he was very fond of Cissy and she of
“You don’t know what Barney has been to me, these past two years,”
“Cissy Gay is the sweetest girl I ever knew—and there’s a man somewhere
glorious rainy day when Barney and Abel swapped yarns all the afternoon
of his adventures with “shacks” on trains while hoboing it across the
cattle-ship sounded more legitimate. And his yarns of the Yukon
enthralled her—especially the one of the night he was lost on the
there. Where in all this was there room for the penitentiary and the
other things?
If he were telling the truth. But Valancy knew he was.
a place to live! Those silences at the back of the north wind _got_ me.
But then she liked everything about him—his tawny hair—his whimsical
smiles—the little glints of fun in his eyes—his loyal affection for
at times almost afraid to let herself think these thoughts. They were
so vivid that she felt as if the others _must_ know what she was
“I’ve been watching a woodpecker all day,” he said one evening on the
shaky old back verandah. His account of the woodpecker’s doings was
satisfying. He had often some gay or cunning little anecdote of the
wood folk to tell them. And sometimes he and Roaring Abel smoked
fiercely the whole evening and never said a word, while Cissy lay in
the hammock swung between the verandah posts and Valancy sat idly on
the steps, her hands clasped over her knees, and wondered dreamily if
she had left the ugly old house on Elm Street.
little rabbits frisked. Barney, when he liked, could sit down on the
edge of the barrens and lure those rabbits right to him by some
from a scrub pine to his shoulder and sit there chattering to him. It
It was one of the delights of Valancy’s new life that she could read
them in bed if she wanted to. She read them all to Cissy, who loved
them. She also tried to read them to Abel and Barney, who did not love
them. Abel was bored and Barney politely refused to listen at all.
Of course, the Stirlings had not left the poor maniac alone all this
doctor, came one day and, finding Valancy alone in the kitchen, as he
mother’s heart and disgracing her family.
decently. “I’m doing honest work for honest pay. What is there in that
“Oh, yes. But the things _I_ am ashamed of are not the things _you_ are
Still was Uncle James patient. He gripped the sides of his chair and
Roaring Abel, suddenly appearing in the doorway of the back verandah
“I was. And, furthermore, I want to tell you that you have acted an
James Stirling got no further. Roaring Abel crossed the kitchen at a
through the doorway and over the garden paling with as little apparent
of the way.
through the window—and all the better if the window is shut! Coming
here, thinking yourself God to put the world to rights!”
more satisfying sights than Uncle James’ coat-tails flying out into the
saw clearly that he was nothing but a rather stupid little village
“He’ll think of that for years when he wakes up in the night. The
Almighty made a mistake in making so many Stirlings. But since they are
made, we’ve got to reckon with them. Too many to kill out. But if they
come here bothering you I’ll shoo ’em off before a cat could lick its
The next time they sent Dr. Stalling. Surely Roaring Abel would not
had no great liking for the task. He did not believe Valancy Stirling
around Mistawis and Muskoka. On one of these occasions he had got lost
Dr. Stalling had contrived to ask his question in about the most
“How the devil should I know where you’re going, gosling?” retorted
and in that moment Abel had disappeared in the woods. Dr. Stalling had
Nevertheless he came now to do his duty. Valancy greeted him with a
polite and very cunning. He had been on the point of going away when
Dr. Stalling arrived, but now he sat down in a corner of the parlour
all. I’ve got the reputation of my household to keep up. I’ve got to
“Miss Stirling, I am here in response to your mother’s wishes. She
you”—he wagged his forefinger—“will you hear them?”
“Yes,” said Valancy faintly, eyeing the forefinger. It had a hypnotic
regard the matter as desperate when he would loosen his purse-strings
She had become important to them.
to my ribs. She don’t forget to put salt in the porridge. She never
one does”—Abel’s voice was uncannily bland and polite—“I’ll spatter the
the least idea what she was up to, but he was sure her motive was not
mother. _She_ needs you. She implores you to come home—she will forgive
all, the power these preacher fellows have over women.”
Valancy _was_ on the point of obeying Dr. Stalling. She must go home
for her few remaining days or weeks be the cowed, futile creature she
predestination. She eyed it as the fascinated bird eyes the snake.
Another moment—
“_Fear is the original sin_,” suddenly said a still, small voice away
back—back—back of Valancy’s consciousness. “_Almost all the evil in the
world has its origin in the fact that some one is afraid of
Valancy stood up. She was still in the clutches of fear, but her soul
my mother. She is quite well; she has all the assistance and
“Miss Stirling, is there _nothing_ that can influence you? Do you
“Perfectly. And hate them.”
“Do you realise what people will say? What they _are_ saying?”
was suddenly free of fear again. “I haven’t listened to the gossip of
Dr. Stalling, it doesn’t matter in the least to me what they say—not in
the least.”
Dr. Stalling went away then. A girl who cared nothing for public
the little vegetable garden she had planted, and she made all the
not be as thick as porridge and as salt as the Dead Sea?”
if Valancy had died. She could have worn mourning then.
promptly, in bills reeking with the odour of tobacco and
She passed the house on Elm Street twice—Valancy never even thought
about it as “home”—but saw no one. No doubt her mother was sitting in
the room this lovely June evening playing solitaire—and cheating.
Most of the people Valancy met looked at her seriously and passed her
sleeves. And that low, crimson girdle around the hips seemed positively
indecent. She hung it up in the closet, feeling flatly that she had
wasted her money. She would never have the courage to wear that dress.
odd brown jewels and the girdle had given her flat figure an entirely
different appearance. She wished she could have left it on. But there
Every Sunday evening Valancy went to the little Free Methodist church
in a valley on the edge of “up back”—a spireless little grey building
among the pines, with a few sunken graves and mossy gravestones in the
small, paling-encircled, grass-grown square beside it. She liked the
minister who preached there. He was so simple and sincere. An old man,
who lived in Port Lawrence and came out by the lake in a little
disappearing propeller boat to give a free service to the people of the
small, stony farms back of the hills, who would otherwise never have
heard any gospel message. She liked the simple service and the fervent
singing. She liked to sit by the open window and look out into the pine
Sunday evenings. For the first time in her life she liked going to
not turned anything. She went to the church because she liked it and
Oddly enough, Roaring Abel disapproved of her going to the hill church
dances at Chidley Corners were not, as a rule, the sort of assemblies
coming off, for Roaring Abel had been engaged as one of the fiddlers.
But the idea of going had never occurred to her until Roaring Abel
“You come with me to the dance,” he ordered. “It’ll do you good—put
dances had been fashioned on the correct affairs that went by that name
in Deerwood and Port Lawrence. Of course she knew the Corners’ dance
wouldn’t be just like them. Much more informal, of course. But so much
the more interesting. Why shouldn’t she go? Cissy was in a week of
apparent health and improvement. She wouldn’t mind staying alone in the
She went to her room to dress. A rage against the snuff-brown silk
old maidishness. She would not be ridden by it. On went the dress—the
It was the first time she had worn a pretty dress since the organdies
of her early teens. And _they_ had never made her look like this.
then. She ran down to the garden. There were clovers there—great
crimson things growing in the long grass. Valancy gathered handfuls of
them and strung them on a cord. Fastened above her neck they gave her
the comfortable sensation of a collar and were oddly becoming. Another
circlet of them went round her hair, dressed in the low puffs that
flung on her coat and pulled the little, twisty hat over her hair.
moonbeam with a gleam of red in it, if there could be such a thing.”
the Corners, but I used to go sometimes, long ago, to dances up back.
We always had good times. And you needn’t be afraid of Father being
But—there may be—liquor. What will you do if it gets rough?”
“Not seriously, I suppose. Father would see to that. But it _might_ be
Cissy smiled rather dubiously. She knew much better than Valancy what a
party “up back” might be like if there should be liquor. But again
there mightn’t be.
Valancy enjoyed the drive there. They went early, for it was twelve
miles to Chidley Corners, and they had to go in Abel’s old, ragged
full of the austere charm of northern woods. It wound through
beautiful, purring pines that were ranks of enchantment in the June
sunset, and over the curious jade-green rivers of Muskoka, fringed by
Roaring Abel was excellent company, too. He knew all the stories and
legends of the wild, beautiful “up back,” and he told them to Valancy
as they drove along. Valancy had several fits of inward laughter over
and say if they saw her driving with Roaring Abel in that terrible
At first the dance was quiet enough, and Valancy was amused and
Another compliment came her way—not a very subtle one, perhaps, but
point. She overheard two of the “up back” young men talking about her
in the dark “lean-to” behind her.
pretty and prettily dressed. Valancy thought it the nicest party she
almost all the men were partly drunk. Those in the porch and outside
around the door began howling “come-all-ye’s” and continued to howl
them. The room grew noisy and reeking. Quarrels started up here and
there. Bad language and obscene songs were heard. The girls, swung
rudely in the dances, became dishevelled and tawdry. Valancy, alone in
head was aching—she was sick of the whole thing. But what could she do?
She must stay to the end. Abel could not leave till then. And that
would probably be not till three or four in the morning.
The new influx of boys had left the girls far in the minority and
She refused them all shortly, and some of her refusals were not well
taken. There were muttered oaths and sullen looks. Across the room she
saw a group of the strangers talking together and glancing meaningly at
her. What were they plotting?
It was at this moment that she saw Barney Snaith looking in over the
heads of the crowd at the doorway. Valancy had two distinct
convictions—one was that she was quite safe now; the other was that
_this_ was why she had wanted to come to the dance. It had been such an
had come because of the possibility that Barney might be there, too.
annoyance with Barney for coming there unshaved. Surely he might have
But she was not afraid any longer. One of the whispering group left his
comrades and came across the room to her, through the whirling couples
dragged out into the maze of shouting, stamping, yelling dancers. The
next moment the man who held her went staggering across the room from a
neatly planted blow on the jaw, knocking down whirling couples as he
“This way—quick,” said Barney Snaith. He swung her out through the open
window behind them, vaulted lightly over the sill and caught her hand.
“Quick—we must run for it—they’ll be after us.”
the first time Valancy felt a little sorry for them. Also, she felt
They finally reached a quiet corner in the pine woods. The pursuit had
taken a different direction and the whoops and yells behind them were
collapsed on the trunk of a fallen pine.
Valancy knew Barney could not realise how ignorant she was of the
the dark pines. So he had actually come up to look after her.
“As soon as they stop hunting for us we’ll sneak around to the Muskoka
road. I left Lady Jane down there. I’ll take you home. I suppose you’ve
“Quite,” said Valancy meekly. The first half of the way home neither of
them said anything. It would not have been much use. Lady Jane made so
much noise they could not have heard each other. Anyway, Valancy did
not feel conversationally inclined. She was ashamed of the whole
infidel, forger and defaulter. Valancy’s lips twitched in the darkness
trees shot by them. The tall mulleins stood up along the road in stiff,
drunken fairies or tipsy elves as their car-lights passed over them.
This was the first time she had even been in a car. After all, she
liked it. She was not in the least afraid, with Barney at the wheel.
Her spirits rose rapidly as they tore along. She ceased to feel
comet rushing gloriously through the night of space.
All at once, just where the pine woods frayed out to the scrub barrens,
my hurry to get to the Corners.”
road—and some of those crazy fools back at the Corners may come
straggling along presently. There were boys there from the Port. As far
as I can see, the best thing to do is for us just to sit patiently here
“Well, what’s the matter with that?” said Valancy.
while saying we’ll say it. Otherwise, not. Don’t imagine you’re bound
They sat in silence for a long while. Little rabbits hopped across the
them was fringed with the woven shadow lace of trees. Away off to the
southwest the sky was full of silvery little cirrus clouds above the
She had realised, quite simply and fully, that she loved him, in the
moment when he was leaning on the car door, explaining that Lady Jane
had no gas. She had looked deep into his eyes in the moonlight and had
was a woman, full of love and therefore rich and significant—justified
and remote and purely spiritual as the tiny blue spark in the heart of
the unbreakable diamond. No dream had ever been like this. She was no
longer solitary. She was one of a vast sisterhood—all the women who had
ever loved in the world.
Barney need never know it—though she would not in the least have minded
just to sit there beside him in silence, alone in the summer night in
the white splendour of moonshine, with the wind blowing down on them
out of the pine woods. She had always envied the wind. So free. Blowing
where it listed. Through the hills. Over the lakes. What a tang, what a
exchanged her shop-worn soul for a fresh one, fire-new from the
workshop of the gods. As far back as she could look, life had been
violets, purple and fragrant—hers for the plucking. No matter who or
herself utterly to the charm of the moment.
“I do—often. Dream of sailing through the clouds—seeing the glories of
sunset—spending hours in the midst of a terrific storm with lightning
things. One felt he understood everything—even the things you didn’t
tell him. And then she told him a little of her existence before she
came to Roaring Abel’s. She wanted him to see why she had gone to the
“You see—I’ve never had any real life,” she said. “I’ve just—breathed.
added in her heart. “I never had a life like other girls. You couldn’t
the worst about her—“I didn’t even love my mother. Isn’t it awful that
I don’t love my mother?”
“Rather awful—for her,” said Barney drily.
“They did—and do—literally,” said Valancy. “But it’s a comfort to them.
They’d rather believe me mad than bad. There’s no other alternative.
“Moonlight here on the verge of up back is different from moonlight
somehow—body and soul. And of course the age of gold always comes back
It was ten o’clock now. A dragon of black cloud ate up the moon. The
spring air grew chill—Valancy shivered. Barney reached back into the
Gay’s—though I’ve done the foolishest things. It’s funny, too—I used to
have them all the time. I feel so selfish taking your coat.”
after you so! She snuggled down into the tobaccoey folds and wished the
Ten minutes later a car swooped down on them from “up back.” Barney
them. Valancy saw Uncle Wellington and Olive gazing at her in horror
So Uncle Wellington had got a car! And he must have been spending the
aloud at the expression on his face as he recognised her. The pompous,
shameless pair! But not to give it to them! To go away and leave them
there in the Mistawis woods—until daylight, likely. It was better to
give it to them and let them get out of sight before any one else saw
them.
to the rear of the Stirling car and began manipulating the tap. Valancy
stole sly glances at Olive over the collar of Barney’s coat. Olive was
deranged and was exceedingly anxious to find out whence the derangement
had been inherited. It was a serious thing to have in the family—a very
“She got it from the Wansbarras,” said Olive positively. “There’s
nothing like that in the Stirlings—nothing!”
then—to go out as a servant—for that is what it practically amounts to.
Poor Olive felt the implication. The Port Lawrence Prices were not
accustomed to ally themselves with families whose members “worked out.”
For a moment Olive resolved she would take no further notice of
Valancy. Then duty came uppermost. She must not miss the opportunity.
induce the prodigal daughter to return? “We’ll never cast it up to you.
Doss, there are nights when I cannot sleep for thinking of you.”
“And me having the time of my life,” said Valancy, laughing.
was tilted down over one eye. Olive stared. In the moonlight Valancy’s
“Thanks—that’s enough,” said Barney behind the car. “Much obliged, Mr.
to give Snaith a piece of his mind, but dared not. Who knew what the
her back on him and was watching Barney pour the gas into Lady Jane’s
The next thing the Stirlings heard was that Valancy had been seen with
Barney Snaith in a movie theatre in Port Lawrence and after it at
supper in a Chinese restaurant there. This was quite true—and no one
“I’m going to the Port. Will you go there with me?”
His eyes were teasing and there was a bit of defiance in his voice.
little air on the verandah, saw them whirl by in a cloud of dust and
sought comfort in each other’s eyes. Valancy, who in some dim
smoking a pipe. They were going at the rate of forty miles an
hour—sixty, Cousin Stickles averred. Lady Jane could hit the pike when
“Was it for this,” she demanded in hollow tones, “that I suffered the
pangs of motherhood?”
weeks since she had sat there with them on that verandah. Hating the
Lady Jane flew over the fifteen miles between Deerwood and the
Port—through the Port. The way Barney went past traffic policemen was
not holy. The lights were beginning to twinkle out like stars in the
clear, lemon-hued twilight air. This was the only time Valancy ever
really liked the town, and she was crazy with the delight of speeding.
to go on the impulse of the moment—an impulse born of a feeling of pity
little fun. He’d give her an outing for once. Besides, Abel was in the
kitchen, at the point of drunkenness where he was declaring he did not
she should be out of the way for a while. Barney knew Roaring Abel’s
They went to the movie—Valancy had never been to a movie. And then,
finding a nice hunger upon them, they went and had fried
chicken—unbelievably delicious—in the Chinese restaurant. After which
they rattled home again, leaving a devastating trail of scandal behind
them. Mrs. Frederick gave up going to church altogether. She could not
went every Sunday. She said they had been given a cross to bear.
story. They were sitting by the open window. Cissy could not get her
over the wooded hills and in its spectral light Cissy looked frail and
could have lived through all the passion and pain and shame of her
“He was stopping at the hotel across the lake. He used to come over in
his canoe at night—we met in the pines down the shore. He was a young
college student—his father was a rich man in Toronto. Oh, Valancy, I
didn’t—understand. Then his father came and took him away. And—after a
explain—it seemed a worse thing to do than—the other. He—he argued a
I suppose I should have been—but I wasn’t. Father wasn’t hard on me.
so much, the dear little thing. He was so sweet, Valancy—with such
would never open them again—to miss his warm little body nestled
face under the hard frozen earth. It was so awful for the first
“‘Who could endure life if it were not for the hope of death?’”
saw the change that had come over Cissy’s face she wanted to telephone
for the doctor. But Cissy wouldn’t let her.
your hand. Oh, I’m so glad you’re here. Tell Father good-bye for me.
when it was over, still holding to Valancy’s hand. Valancy sat there in
the silence. She was not frightened—or even sorry. At sunrise Cissy
Valancy crossed Cissy’s hands on her breast and went to the open
window. In the eastern sky, amid the fires of sunrise, an old moon was
faded out of sight in the living rose of day. A little pool in the
barrens shone in the sunrise like a great golden lily.
But the world suddenly seemed a colder place to Valancy. Again nobody
needed her. She was not in the least sorry Cecilia was dead. She was
died so quietly—so pleasantly. And at the very last—something—had made
up to her for everything. She was lying there now, in her white sleep,
looking like a child. Beautiful! All the lines of shame and pain gone.
him. The shock sobered him at once. He slumped down on the seat of his
come so soon. Dead. She used to run down the lane to meet me with a
the day of the funeral. Barney Snaith was not there. He had done all he
could to help Valancy before it—he had shrouded the pale Cecilia in
white roses from the garden—and then had gone back to his island. But
everybody else was there. All Deerwood and “up back” came. They forgave
avoided all dubious points and it was plain to be seen he hoped for the
in decorous Deerwood cemetery. Among them was Uncle Wellington.
The Stirlings all came to the funeral, men and women. They had had a
would come home. She simply could not stay there with Roaring Abel.
That being the case, the wisest course—decreed Uncle James—was to
attend the funeral—legitimise the whole thing, so to speak—show
Death, the miracle worker, suddenly made the thing quite respectable.
modest little thing she had been—“and motherless, you know—motherless!”
It was the psychological moment—said Uncle James.
So the Stirlings went to the funeral. Even Cousin Gladys’ neuritis
allowed her to come. Cousin Stickles was there, her bonnet dripping all
marshalling the “mourners” into the parlour, was so decorous and proper
not be—the girl who had sat all night in the woods with Barney
Lawrence. This was the Valancy they knew. Really, surprisingly capable
much—Amelia really was rather strict—hadn’t had a chance to show what
was in her. So thought the Stirlings. And Edward Beck, from the Port
very reasonably, couldn’t expect everything. Altogether, it seemed that
Valancy’s matrimonial chances were never so bright as they were at
What the Stirlings and Edward Beck would have thought had they known
the back of Valancy’s mind must be left to the imagination. Valancy was
hating the funeral—hating the people who came to stare with curiosity
at Cecilia’s marble-white face—hating the smugness—hating the dragging,
could have had her absurd way, there would have been no funeral at all.
prying eyes, and buried her beside her nameless little baby in the
grassy burying-ground under the pines of the “up back” church, with a
bit of kindly prayer from the old Free Methodist minister. She
remembered Cissy saying once, “I wish I could be buried deep in the
heart of the woods where nobody would ever come to say, ‘Cissy Gay is
But this! However, it would soon be over. Valancy knew, if the
Stirlings and Edward Beck didn’t, exactly what she intended to do then.
She had lain awake all the preceding night thinking about it and
When the funeral procession had left the house, Mrs. Frederick sought
out Valancy in the kitchen.
be several guests from “up back”—distant relatives of the Gays’ who had
not remembered them for years. And she was so tired she wished she
could borrow a pair of legs from the cat.
have to stay for a day or two, to put the house in order generally. But
that will be all. Excuse me, Mother, won’t you? I’ve a frightful lot to
Mrs. Frederick retreated in considerable relief, and the Stirlings went
back,” decreed Uncle Benjamin. “That will be the best plan. Just as if
On the evening of the day after the funeral Roaring Abel went off for a
longer. Before he went, Valancy told him she would be going away the
since there was no sick girl to wait on—but Abel was not under any
did for Cissy. I’m your friend, and if you ever want any of the
“You’ll find the key on the woodshed nail,” interrupted Valancy,
politely and unmistakably. “The dog will be in the barn and the cat in
the cellar. Don’t forget to feed her till your cousin comes. The pantry
“We’ve had a d——d decent time of it together, and that’s a fact,” said
Roaring Abel. “You’re the best small sport in the world, and your
little finger is worth the whole Stirling clan tied together. Good-bye
Valancy went out to the garden. Her legs trembled a little, but
otherwise she felt and looked composed. She held something tightly in
her hand. The garden was lying in the magic of the warm, odorous July
twilight. A few stars were out and the robins were calling through the
velvety silences of the barrens. Valancy stood by the gate expectantly.
He was coming. Valancy heard Lady Jane Grey far back in the woods. Her
Jane now—bumping down the lane—nearer—nearer—he was there—he had sprung
from the car and was leaning over the gate, looking at her.
shadow of turning, but the moment was very tremendous.
“I thought I’d run down and ask if there was anything I could do for
“Yes, there is something you can do for me,” she said, evenly and
“Come, now! I knew luck was just waiting around the corner for me. All
the signs have been pointing that way today.”
perfectly well that this is one of the things ‘a lady should not do.’”
looked Barney straight in the eyes, while all the dead Stirlings
revolved rapidly in their graves and the living ones did nothing
because they did not know that Valancy was at that moment proposing
lawful marriage to the notorious Barney Snaith. “The first reason is,
Barney opened it with the air of a man thankful to find some safe, sane
Valancy did not misunderstand the question.
_live_ them. I can’t go back to Deerwood—you know what my life was like
there. And”—she managed it this time—“I love you. I want to spend the
Barney folded his arms on the gate and looked gravely enough at a
“No, I don’t. You _may_ be something dreadful. Everything they say of
looking away from the star and into her eyes—her strange, mysterious
had called her by her name for the first time. It was sweeter than
another man’s caress could have been just to hear him say her name like
me about them.”
“And we are never to pretend anything to each other.”
“And we’ll never tell a lie to each other about anything—a big lie or a
“I believe you mean it. Well—let’s get married, then.”
a letter to my mother—here it is—you are to keep it. I have explained
“It will exonerate me in the eyes of your kindred from the suspicion of
has been—a bit of an ordeal. You see, I’m not in the habit of going
offer to be a brother!”
“I’ll go to the Port tomorrow and get a license. We can be married
shake his forefinger at me and I’d jilt you at the altar. No, I want my
Barney put his hands over the gate and took her little, cold ones
though she expected he must go rattling past on his way to the Port for
But at dusk the lights of Lady Jane suddenly swooped over the crest of
the wooded hill beyond the lane. Valancy was waiting at the gate for
bride-like—she really looked like a wild elf strayed out of the
and overalls. But they were clean overalls. He was smoking a
clattered into Deerwood and through Deerwood and hit the long, wooded
road to the Port.
That was their whole conversation on the fifteen miles. Everything was
more dream-like than ever. Valancy didn’t know whether she felt happy.
Then the lights of Port Lawrence were about them. Valancy felt as if
she were surrounded by the gleaming, hungry eyes of hundreds of great,
stealthy panthers. Barney briefly asked where Mr. Towers lived, and
Valancy as briefly told him. They stopped before the shabby little
house in an unfashionable street. They went in to the small, shabby
This thing was real. She, Valancy Stirling, was actually on the point
They were standing up together before Mr. Towers. Valancy heard Mr.
Towers and Barney saying things. She heard some other person saying
things. She herself was thinking of the way she had once planned to be
roses and lilies-of-the-valley. And the groom, a noble-looking
creature, irreproachably clad in whatever the fashion of the day
decreed. Valancy lifted her eyes and saw herself and Barney in the
little, slanting, distorting mirror over the mantelpiece. She in her
presents—no wedding-cake—but just Barney. For all the rest of her life
there would be Barney.
He had not seemed surprised at their appearance—not even at Barney’s
know Valancy was one of the Deerwood Stirlings—he did not even know
there _were_ Deerwood Stirlings. He did not know Barney Snaith was a
Therefore he married them and gave them his blessing very gently and
solemnly and prayed for them that night after they had gone away. His
married and talk as if we weren’t. I can’t stand another drive like the
“The jolliest place in the world. You’re going to love it. The first
time I saw it I loved it. Old Tom MacMurray owned it then. He built the
little shack on it, lived there in winter and rented it to Toronto
Most of the scenery belongs to the government, but they don’t tax you
for looking at it, and the moon belongs to everybody. You won’t find my
“No, you’ll only sweep up after me with the air of a martyr,” said
Barney. “Well, anyway, you can’t tidy the lean-to. You can’t even enter
it. The door will be locked and I shall keep the key.”
don’t care how many wives you have hanging up in it. So long as they’re
“Dead as door-nails. You can do as you like in the rest of the house.
cedar and the rafters fir. Our living-room windows face west and east.
sunset. I have two cats there. Banjo and Good Luck. Adorable animals.
one cat is allowed to speak. My cats are philosophers—neither of them
“Two old crows live in a pine-tree on the point and are reasonably
the mainland and chuckles to himself o’ nights. And bats—it’s a great
“No; I like them.”
canoe and a disappearing propeller boat. Went to the Port in it today
Barney laughed—the laugh Valancy did not like—the little, bitter,
They went back through Deerwood. Up the Muskoka road. Past Roaring
Abel’s. Over the rocky, daisied lane. The dark pine woods swallowed
them up. Through the pine woods, where the air was sweet with the
incense of the unseen, fragile bells of the linnæas that carpeted the
banks of the trail. Out to the shore of Mistawis. Lady Jane must be
left here. They got out. Barney led the way down a little path to the
edge of the lake.
lilac mist on the lake, shrouding the island. Through it the two
like dark turrets. Behind them was a sky still rose-hued in the
Valancy shivered like a tree the wind stirs suddenly. Something seemed
They got into the canoe and paddled out to it. They left behind the
lifted Valancy out of the canoe and swung her to a lichen-covered rock
were on hers. Valancy found herself shivering with the rapture of her
Cousin Georgiana came down the lane leading up to her little house. She
rather a dull life of it. Cousin Georgiana owned to herself that _she_
changed now. Cousin Georgiana felt tremendously important. For the time
being, she quite forgot to wonder which of them would go next.
And here was Doss herself, coming along the road from Roaring Abel’s in
that she was married. Otherwise, finding that she had disappeared from
Roaring Abel’s, they might get out a search warrant for her. Barney had
the houses along the road were becoming numerous, she was conscious
Nothing mattered but Barney and the Blue Castle up back in Mistawis.
“Who do you suppose called to see me the other day?” asked Cousin
Why the italics? And _was_ Cousin Georgiana blushing?
that lovely house on the Port Lawrence road and he comes to our
always sits in the pew by the door, isn’t he?”
old—he’s only about forty-eight—the prime of life, Doss—and what does
not matter to her whether Edward Beck had a wen or a dozen wens or no
“Yes, you. He fell in love with you at the funeral. And he came to
shall be given.’ Do you really think I would make a good stepmother,
“The two oldest are grown up and the third almost. That leaves only six
that really count. And most of them are boys. So much easier to bring
up than girls. There’s an excellent book—‘Health Care of the Growing
there are books about morals. You’d manage nicely. Of course I told Mr.
“Not at all. I’m only telling you the truth. For heaven’s sake, Cousin
here on the public road!”
Cousin Georgiana choked back the tears and gave a little moan of
“To that—that—aw—that—_Barney Snaith_. Why, they say he’s had a dozen
“I’m the only one round at present,” said Valancy.
“What will your poor mother say?” moaned Cousin Georgiana.
Cousin Georgiana let go the gate-post cautiously and found that she
what the poor girl had done. So rash. So reckless. Of course Valancy
Georgiana had a momentary conviction that it would be a pity if the
When they turned in at the Stirling gate Valancy gave an exclamation of
laughing. She gathered a handful of the blossoms—they would look well
on the supper-table of the verandah at Mistawis—and went, still
laughing, up the walk, conscious that Olive was standing on the steps,
cousin through new eyes—“without the slightest touch of distinction.”
was not looking like a repentant, returned prodigal. This was the cause
dress—that queer hat—those hands full of blood-red roses. Yet there was
entirely lacking in her own attire. This deepened the frown. She put
“Valancy Snaith, by the grace of God.”
nimbly stepped past her and into the house. Cousin Georgiana followed.
She would not miss a moment of the great scene, even though Olive did
Olive did not faint. She went stupidly down the street to Mrs.
Valancy opened the sitting-room door and stepped unexpectedly right
into a grim assemblage of Stirlings. They had not come together of
Cousin Sarah had just called in on their way home from a meeting of the
apparently, to tell them it was a hot day and ask them what was the
tactless enough to know the answer—“one gets all the honey, the other
all the whacks”—and Uncle Benjamin was in a bad humour. In all of their
minds, unexpressed, was the idea of finding out if Valancy had yet come
home, and, if not, what steps must be taken in the matter.
young-looking. She stood in the doorway and looked at them, Cousin
qualities in them that she had never seen before. And she was sorry for
them. Her pity made her quite gentle.
“Well, Mother,” she said pleasantly.
Wellington had to help her out to the kitchen.
“She would have to keep up the Victorian traditions,” said Valancy,
“Is there _one_ day in your life that you haven’t cried?” asked Valancy
“Valancy,” said Uncle James, being the first to recover the power of
A dangerous spark appeared in Valancy’s eyes. They might say what they
liked to and of her but they should not abuse Barney.
“He was seen drunk in Port Lawrence—pickled to the gills,” said Uncle
Now I suggest that you all stop looking tragic and accept the
Cousin Sarah, by way of trying to look on the bright side.
disgraceful. It was the first thing she had said. Mrs. Frederick didn’t
She was sure she must wake up soon. After all their bright hopes at the
helplessly. “Those yarns—you know—of fairies taking babies out of their
“She was the oddest-looking baby I ever saw, anyway,” averred Uncle
Benjamin. “I said so at the time—you remember, Amelia? I said I had
“I’m glad _I_ never had any children,” said Cousin Sarah. “If they
don’t break your heart in one way they do it in another.”
“Isn’t it better to have your heart broken than to have it wither up?”
splendid. _That_ would be worth the pain.”
forgiven for disobeying your mother?”
“I would rather,” said Mrs. Frederick, beginning to cry rather
Valancy looked at her mother and aunts, and wondered if they could ever
have known anything of the real meaning of love. She felt sorrier for
them than ever. They were so very pitiable. And they never suspected
“Oh, _I_ did the deluding. I asked _him_ to marry me,” said Valancy,
“Edward Beck is worth twenty thousand dollars and has the finest house
being Torquemada! Now, I must really be getting back. Mother, may I
“Take them—take everything!” said Mrs. Frederick.
cluttered. Just the cushions. I’ll call for them some day when we motor
Valancy rose and went to the door. There she turned. She was sorrier
than ever for them all. _They_ had no Blue Castle in the purple
Valancy would not ask any of them to come and see her—she was afraid
they _would_ come out of curiosity. But she said:
“Do you mind if I drop in and see you once in a while, Mother?”
the door closed behind Valancy.
“I cannot quite forget that I am a mother,” said Mrs. Frederick. “My
“I dare say the marriage isn’t legal,” said Uncle James comfortingly.
part, I believe the man is half Indian. I haven’t a doubt they’re
“If he has married her under the name of Snaith and it isn’t his real
name wouldn’t that make the marriage null and void?” asked Cousin
“No, it is the man who marries, not the name.”
dinner. I remarked it at the time. When she was defending Snaith. You
“What—_what_,” demanded Aunt Wellington of the universe, “has come over
“Isn’t there something coming up of late about secondary personalities
there may be something in this one. It would account for her
she’ll get poisoned eating toadstools by mistake living up back in the
it was the first time in the world that such a statement had been made.
“Nothing can ever be the same again!” sobbed Cousin Stickles.
Valancy, hurrying along the dusty road, back to cool Mistawis and her
purple island, had forgotten all about them—just as she had forgotten
Summer passed by. The Stirling clan—with the insignificant exception of
through Deerwood and out to the Port in that unspeakable car. Valancy,
pipe. But shaved. Always shaved now, if any of them had noticed it.
They even had the audacity to go in to Uncle Benjamin’s store to buy
groceries. Twice Uncle Benjamin ignored them. Was not Valancy one of
the dead? While Snaith had never existed. But the third time he told
a pup. Why not think of something worthy of the Stirlings? Besides, I’m
room. It was in a world which had nothing in common with the one she
immortal youth—where there was neither past nor future but only the
present. She surrendered herself utterly to the charm of it.
as they liked. No Mrs. Grundy. No traditions. No relatives. Or in-laws.
Georgiana. “It’s so out of the world.”
“Contented!” Valancy laughed. What was the use of trying to explain to
out of the world.”
exquisite Mistawis. The one in the end of the room was an oriel
little, old “up back” church that had been sold. It faced the west and
when the sunsets flooded it Valancy’s whole being knelt in prayer as if
in some great cathedral. The new moons always looked down through it,
the lower pine boughs swayed about the top of it, and all through the
nights the soft, dim silver of the lake dreamed through it.
There was a stone fireplace on the other side. No desecrating gas
big grizzly bearskin on the floor before it, and beside it a hideous,
and comfortable. In a corner a nice, tall, lazy old clock ticked—the
right kind of a clock. One that did not hurry the hours away but ticked
them off deliberately. It was the jolliest looking old clock. A fat,
corpulent clock with a great, round, man’s face painted on it, the
hands stretching out of its nose and the hours encircling it like a
adorable habit of hanging over the back of it, trying to catch his own
pain. Barney and Valancy laughed at him until they ached. But it was
Good Luck they loved. They were both agreed that Good Luck was so
One side of the wall was lined with rough, homemade book-shelves filled
with books, and between the two side windows hung an old mirror in a
faded gilt frame, with fat cupids gamboling in the panel over the
glass. A mirror, Valancy thought, that must be like the fabled mirror
into which Venus had once looked and which thereafter reflected as
This was before the day of bobs and was regarded as a wild, unheard-of
almost decided to erase Valancy’s name from the family Bible. Barney
cut the hair, square off at the back of Valancy’s neck, bringing it
her sallow skin had cleared to the hue of creamy ivory. The old family
Valancy might never be beautiful, but she was of the type that looks
its best in the woods—elfin—mocking—alluring.
Her heart bothered her very little. When an attack threatened she was
And it _was_ a bad one. For the time being, Valancy realised keenly
that death was actually waiting to pounce on her any moment. But the
rest of the time she would not—did not—let herself remember it at all.
Valancy toiled not, neither did she spin. There was really very little
work to do. She cooked their meals on a coal-oil stove, performing all
her little domestic rites carefully and exultingly, and they ate out on
the verandah that almost overhung the lake. Before them lay Mistawis,
twisted, enigmatical smile at her across the table.
Supper was the meal Valancy liked best. The faint laughter of winds was
always about them and the colours of Mistawis, imperial and spiritual,
under the changing clouds were something that cannot be expressed in
mere words. Shadows, too. Clustering in the pines until a wind shook
them out and pursued them over Mistawis. They lay all day along the
shores, threaded by ferns and wild blossoms. They stole around the
headlands in the glow of the sunset, until twilight wove them all into
The cats, with their wise, innocent little faces, would sit on the
verandah railing and eat the tidbits Barney flung them. And how good
everything tasted! Valancy, amid all the romance of Mistawis, never
“After all,” he admitted, “there’s something to be said for square
After the meal was over they would sit there and talk for hours—or sit
and say nothing, in all the languages of the world, Barney pulling away
at his pipe, Valancy dreaming idly and deliciously, gazing at the
far-off hills beyond Mistawis where the spires of firs came out against
the sunset. The moonlight would begin to silver the Mistawis dusk. Bats
would begin to swoop darkly against the pale, western gold. The little
waterfall that came down on the high bank not far away would, by some
whim of the wildwood gods, begin to look like a wonderful white woman
beckoning through the spicy, fragrant evergreens. And Leander would
begin to chuckle diabolically on the mainland shore. How sweet it was
to sit there and do nothing in the beautiful silence, with Barney at
the other side of the table, smoking!
There were plenty of other islands in sight, though none were near
islets far off to the west which they called the Fortunate Isles. At
sunrise they looked like a cluster of emeralds, at sunset like a
cluster of amethysts. They were too small for houses; but the lights on
the larger islands would bloom out all over the lake, and bonfires
would be lighted on their shores, streaming up into the wood shadows
and throwing great, blood-red ribbons over the waters. Music would
drift to them alluringly from boats here and there, or from the
verandahs on the big house of the millionaire on the biggest island.
the size of the rich man’s “cottage” and now pitied the poor
boss. Just like ours here. I don’t envy Hamilton Gossard ‘the finest
Away down at the far end of the lake they got every night a glimpse of
and herself going to the dances and dinners in the houses on the
islands, but she did not want to go in reality. Once they did go to a
masquerade dance in the pavilion at one of the hotels up the lake, and
had a glorious evening, but slipped away in their canoe, before
unmasking time, back to the Blue Castle.
Valancy never saw the inside of it. From the smells that filtered
experiments—or counterfeiting money. Valancy supposed there must be
herself about it. She had no desire to peer into the locked chambers of
heard was Lady Jane’s clatter through the woods when Barney returned.
And then his signal whistle from the shore. She ran down to the landing
rock to greet him—to nestle herself into his eager arms—they _did_ seem
“Who said or wrote that ‘the prison unto which we doom ourselves no
prison is’?” asked Valancy dreamily, clinging to his arm as they
climbed up the rock steps.
“Ah, now you have it,” said Barney. “That’s all the freedom we can hope
for—the freedom to choose our prison. But, Moonlight,”—he stopped at
the door of the Blue Castle and looked about him—at the glorious lake,
the great, shadowy woods, the bonfires, the twinkling
the woods and saw my home lights—mine—gleaming out under the old
But in spite of Barney’s doctrine of bondage, Valancy thought they were
splendidly free. It was amazing to be able to sit up half the night and
look at the moon if you wanted to. To be late for meals if you wanted
to—she who had always been rebuked so sharply by her mother and so
rock and paddle your bare feet in the hot sand if you wanted to. Just
sit and do nothing in the beautiful silence if you wanted to. In short,
do any fool thing you wanted to whenever the notion took you. If _that_
They didn’t spend all their days on the island. They spent more than
half of them wandering at will through the enchanted Muskoka country.
Barney knew the woods as a book and he taught their lore and craft to
Valancy. He could always find trail and haunt of the shy wood people.
Valancy learned the different fairy-likenesses of the mosses—the charm
well as Barney himself. She liked to be out in the rain and she never
Sometimes they took a lunch with them and went berrying—strawberries
and blueberries. How pretty blueberries were—the dainty green of the
unripe berries, the glossy pinks and scarlets of the half ripes, the
misty blue of the fully matured! And Valancy learned the real flavour
of the strawberry in its highest perfection. There was a certain sunlit
dell on the banks of Mistawis along which white birches grew on one
side and on the other still, changeless ranks of young spruces. There
were long grasses at the roots of the birches, combed down by the winds
and wet with morning dew late into the afternoons. Here they found
berries that might have graced the banquets of Lucullus, great
lifted them by the stalk and ate them from it, uncrushed and virgin,
therein. When Valancy carried any of these berries home that elusive
essence escaped and they became nothing more than the common berries of
the market-place—very kitchenly good indeed, but not as they would have
been, eaten in their birch dell until her fingers were stained as pink
Or they went after water-lilies. Barney knew where to find them in the
creeks and bays of Mistawis. Then the Blue Castle was glorious with
them, every receptacle that Valancy could contrive filled with the
exquisite things. If not water lilies then cardinal flowers, fresh and
vivid from the swamps of Mistawis, where they burned like ribbons of
Sometimes they went trouting on little nameless rivers or hidden brooks
on whose banks Naiads might have sunned their white, wet limbs. Then
all they took with them were some raw potatoes and salt. They roasted
the potatoes over a fire and Barney showed Valancy how to cook the
trout by wrapping them in leaves, coating them with mud and baking them
Or they just prowled and explored through woods that always seemed to
be expecting something wonderful to happen. At least, that was the way
Valancy felt about them. Down the next hollow—over the next hill—you
Once or twice night overtook them, too far from their Blue Castle to
they slept on it dreamlessly, under a ceiling of old spruces with moss
hanging from them, while beyond them moonlight and the murmur of pines
blended together so that one could hardly tell which was light and
they never thought of staying in because of it. Days when it rained in
right good earnest and they had to stay in. Then Barney shut himself up
in Bluebeard’s Chamber and Valancy read, or dreamed on the wolfskins
with Good Luck purring beside her and Banjo watching them suspiciously
from his own peculiar chair. On Sunday evenings they paddled across to
a point of land and walked from there through the woods to the little
Valancy had taken some of her two hundred dollars out of the bank and
spent it in pretty clothes. She had a little smoke-blue chiffon which
she always put on when they spent the evening at home—smoke-blue with
just between your collar bones. You have the wrist and ankle of an
twilight or moonlight. An elf maiden. A wood sprite. You belong to the
woods, Moonlight—you should never be out of them. In spite of your
ancestry, there is something wild and remote and untamed about you. And
“Shure an’ ye’ve kissed the Blarney Stone,” scoffed Valancy. But she
tasted these compliments for weeks.
her clan their deaths if they had ever seen her in it. Barney taught
and didn’t take it off until she went to bed—running down to the water
for a plunge whenever she felt like it and sprawling on the sun-warm
She had forgotten all the old humiliating things that used to come up
against her in the night—the injustices and the disappointments. It was
as if they had all happened to some other person—not to her, Valancy
Holmes speaks of grief “staining backward” through the pages of life;
One day Valancy had heaped up the sand in the little island cove in a
Autumn came. Late September with cool nights. They had to forsake the
verandah; but they kindled a fire in the big fireplace and sat before
it with jest and laughter. They left the doors open, and Banjo and Good
Luck came and went at pleasure. Sometimes they sat gravely on the
bearskin rug between Barney and Valancy; sometimes they slunk off into
the mystery of the chill night outside. The stars smouldered in the
horizon mists through the old oriel. The haunting, persistent croon of
the pine-trees filled the air. The little waves began to make soft,
sobbing splashes on the rocks below them in the rising winds. They
needed no light but the firelight that sometimes leaped up and revealed
them—sometimes shrouded them in shadow. When the night wind rose higher
Barney would shut the door and light a lamp and read to her—poetry and
read novels: he vowed they bored him. But sometimes she read them
herself, curled up on the wolf skins, laughing aloud in peace. For
“What is the joke?”
the glades of that fairyland. Long dreamy purple days paddling idly in
their canoe along shores and up the rivers of crimson and gold. A
sleepy, red hunter’s moon. Enchanted tempests that stripped the leaves
from the trees and heaped them along the shores. Flying shadows of
clouds. What had all the smug, opulent lands out front to compare with
sunsets flaming in smoky crimson behind the westering hills. With dear
days when the austere woods were beautiful and gracious in a dignified
sunshine that sifted through the late, leafless gold of the
juniper-trees and glimmered among the grey beeches, lighting up
evergreen banks of moss and washing the colonnades of the pines. Days
melancholy seemed to hang over the landscape and dream about the lake.
But days, too, of the wild blackness of great autumn storms, followed
by dank, wet, streaming nights when there was witch-laughter in the
pines and fitful moans among the mainland trees. What cared they? Old
“Warm fire—books—comfort—safety from storm—our cats on the rug.
then.”
December. Early snows and Orion. The pale fires of the Milky Way. It
throat in the mornings. Cousin Stickles whining over the price of coal.
Her mother, probing, questioning, ignoring. Endless colds and
bronchitis—or the dread of it. Redfern’s Liniment and Purple Pills.
like cups of glamour—the purest vintage of winter’s wine. Nights with
their fire of stars. Cold, exquisite winter sunrises. Lovely ferns of
ice all over the windows of the Blue Castle. Moonlight on birches in a
Mistawis. Icy-grey twilights, broken by snow-squalls, when their cosy
had not even a cold. Later on in the winter Barney had a terrible one
thoughtfully bought a bottle at the Port and Barney had hurled it into
was the first and last time he had spoken harshly to her.
They went for long tramps through the exquisite reticence of winter
woods and the silver jungles of frosted trees, and found loveliness
At times they seemed to be walking through a spellbound world of
Once they stood in a hesitation of ecstasy at the entrance of a narrow
of marble. The shadows cast by the pale sunshine were fine and
“Come away,” said Barney, turning. “We must not commit the desecration
of tramping through there.”
One evening they came upon a snowdrift far back in an old clearing
which was in the exact likeness of a beautiful woman’s profile. Seen
too close by, the resemblance was lost, as in the fairy-tale of the
just the right distance and angle the outline was so perfect that when
they came suddenly upon it, gleaming out against the dark background of
spruce in the glow of that winter sunset they both exclaimed in
sat to the sculptor, and a breast of such cold, swelling purity as the
very spirit of the winter woods might display.
“‘All the beauty that old Greece and Rome, sung painted, taught,’”
breathed Valancy, who felt at times as if she were living in a book by
had marked in the new Foster book Barney had brought her from the
“‘All the tintings of winter woods are extremely delicate and
elusive,’” recalled Valancy. “‘When the brief afternoon wanes and the
sun just touches the tops of the hills, there seems to be all over the
woods an abundance, not of colour, but of the spirit of colour. There
is really nothing but pure white after all, but one has the impression
of fairy-like blendings of rose and violet, opal and heliotrope on the
slopes—in the dingles and along the curves of the forest-land. You feel
sure the tint is there, but when you look at it directly it is gone.
From the corner of your eye you are aware that it is lurking over
yonder in a spot where there was nothing but pale purity a moment ago.
Only just when the sun is setting is there a fleeting moment of real
colour. Then the redness streams out over the snow and incarnadines the
hills and rivers and smites the crest of the pines with flame. Just a
“‘She is a rare artist, this old Mother Nature, who works “for the joy
of working” and not in any spirit of vain show. Today the fir woods are
one shade begins to be the other. Grey trunk, green bough, grey-green
moss above the white, grey-shadowed floor. Yet the old gypsy doesn’t
broken dead fir bough, of a beautiful red-brown, swinging among the
“John Foster’s books were all that saved my soul alive the past five
of snow in the furrows of that old elm-tree trunk.”
When they came out to the lake they changed from snowshoes to skates
little schoolgirl, to skate on the pond behind the Deerwood school. She
never had any skates of her own, but some of the other girls had lent
her theirs and she seemed to have a natural knack of it. Uncle Benjamin
since she grew up, but the old trick came back quickly, and glorious
were the hours she and Barney spent skimming over the white lakes and
past the dark islands where the summer cottages were closed and silent.
Tonight they flew down Mistawis before the wind, in an exhilaration
that crimsoned Valancy’s cheeks under her white tam. And at the end was
her dear little house, on the island of pines, with a coating of snow
on its roof, sparkling in the moonlight. Its windows glinted impishly
at her in the stay gleams.
to make ends meet. No wild effort to remember whether she hadn’t given
the same kind of present to the same person two Christmases before—no
mute and unimportant—no attacks of “nerves.” They decorated the Blue
stars and hung them up amid the greenery. She cooked a dinner to which
Barney did full justice, while Good Luck and Banjo picked the bones.
Barney. “Canada forever!” And they drank to the Union Jack a bottle of
dandelion wine that Cousin Georgiana had given Valancy along with the
of goloshes last Christmas and two long-sleeved, woolen undervests the
life. And these were so pretty. All that worried her was that they were
finances. She had refused to let him buy any of her clothes—she had
enough for that, she told him, as long as she would need clothes. In a
round, black jar on the chimney-piece Barney put money for their
it and enjoy it. It was the first pretty thing she had ever had.
weeks on end. The thermometer went miles below zero and stayed there.
But, as Barney and Valancy pointed out to each other, there were no
mosquitoes. And the roar and crackle of their big fire drowned the
howls of the north wind. Good Luck and Banjo waxed fat and developed
“But they’ll come back in spring,” promised Barney.
There was no monotony. Sometimes they had dramatic little private spats
and played for them, to the delight of all except Banjo, who would go
Barney talked while Valancy made candy for them; sometimes they sat and
smoked in silence _à la_ Tennyson and Carlyle, until the Blue Castle
reeked and Valancy fled to the open. Sometimes they played checkers
fiercely and silently the whole night through. Sometimes they all ate
the russet apples Abel had brought, while the jolly old clock ticked
the delightful minutes away.
have the streets of gold. Let’s have another whack at Carman.”
It was easier now for the Stirlings to believe Valancy of the dead. Not
even dim rumours of her having been over at the Port came to trouble
them, though she and Barney used to skate there occasionally to see a
movie and eat hot dogs shamelessly at the corner stand afterwards.
Presumably none of the Stirlings ever thought about her—except Cousin
silently in the cosiness of those winter nights on that little island
in the frozen lake. The nights of other winters had been so cold and
long. Valancy hated to wake up in them and think about the bleakness
and emptiness of the day that had passed and the bleakness and
emptiness of the day that would come. Now, she almost counted that
and through the open door the smouldering brands in the fireplace
winked at her in the gloom. It was very nice to feel a little Lucky cat
jump up on your bed in the darkness and snuggle down at your feet,
the fire like a brooding demon. At such moments Banjo was anything but
The side of the bed had to be right against the window. There was no
other place for it in the tiny room. Valancy, lying there, could look
out of the window, through the big pine boughs that actually touched
dark and terrible in the storm. Sometimes the pine boughs tapped
against the panes with friendly signals. Sometimes she heard the little
hissing whisper of snow against them right at her side. Some nights the
whole outer world seemed given over to the empery of silence; then came
nights when there would be a majestic sweep of wind in the pines;
around the Blue Castle; brooding nights before storm when it crept
along the floor of the lake with a low, wailing cry of boding and
mystery. Valancy wasted many perfectly good sleeping hours in these
delightful communings. But she could sleep as long in the morning as
and eggs and then shut himself up in Bluebeard’s Chamber till supper
time. Then they had an evening of reading and talk. They talked about
everything in this world and a good many things in other worlds. They
laughed over their own jokes until the Blue Castles re-echoed.
there were so much more fun back of it that you wouldn’t let out. Did
I was expected to. But now—the laugh just comes.”
become wholesome. She rarely heard the little cynical note in it now.
other men Valancy knew—and from some casual remarks he had dropped from
time to time she concluded he knew Montreal rather well. Valancy had it
all figured out in the back of her mind. Barney had been in a bank. He
it back. He had got in deeper and deeper, until he found there was
Valancy was absolutely certain, never meant to do wrong. Of course, the
name of the man in the clipping was Bernard Craig. But Valancy had
when most of the snow had gone and Nip and Tuck had returned. Barney
had gone off in the afternoon for a long, woodland tramp, saying he
begun to snow. The wind rose and presently Mistawis was in the grip of
one of the worst storms of the winter. It tore up the lake and struck
at the little house. The dark angry woods on the mainland scowled at
Valancy, menace in the toss of their boughs, threats in their windy
gloom, terror in the roar of their hearts. The trees on the island
crouched in fear. Valancy spent the night huddled on the rug before the
from the oriel in a futile effort to see through the furious smoke of
Barney? Lost on the merciless lakes? Sinking exhausted in the drifts of
the pathless woods? Valancy died a hundred deaths that night and paid
in full for all the happiness of her Blue Castle. When morning came the
storm broke and cleared; the sun shone gloriously over Mistawis; and at
noon Barney came home. Valancy saw him from the oriel as he came around
a wooded point, slender and black against the glistening white world.
time, his whiskers bristling with indignation. Barney found her there,
“After two years of the Klondike did you think a baby storm like this
could get me? I spent the night in that old lumber shanty over by
Anybody might have been lost in it. When—I saw you—come round the
point—there—something happened to me. I don’t know what. It was as if I
had died and come back to life. I can’t describe it any other way.”
Spring. Mistawis black and sullen for a week or two, then flaming in
sapphire and turquoise, lilac and rose again, laughing through the
in the long twilights and long into the nights; islands fairy-like in a
green haze; the evanescent beauty of wild young trees in early leaf;
frost-like loveliness of the new foliage of juniper-trees; the woods
to the soul of the wilderness; red mist on the maples; willows decked
out with glossy silver pussies; all the forgotten violets of Mistawis
of them beautiful,” said Valancy. “Oh, Barney, look at that wild plum!
“‘Behold the young wild plum-tree which has adorned herself after
earthly loom. I vow the tree is conscious of its loveliness. It is
bridling before our very eyes—as if its beauty were not the most
ephemeral thing in the woods, as it is the rarest and most exceeding,
through the boughs will winnow away a shower of slender petals. But
what matter? Today it is queen of the wild places and it is always
today in the woods.’”
shouldn’t grow in the woods, though. They haven’t any sense of the
They haven’t any of the mystery and reserve of the real wood-flowers.”
“In short, they’ve no secrets,” said Barney. “But wait a bit. The woods
will have their own way even with those obvious dandelions. In a little
grasses in full harmony with the traditions of the forest.”
One of the earliest signs of spring was the renaissance of Lady Jane.
Barney put her on roads that no other car would look at, and they went
through Deerwood in mud to the axles. They passed several Stirlings,
who groaned and reflected that now spring was come they would encounter
met Uncle Benjamin on the street; but he did not realise until he had
gone two blocks further on that the girl in the scarlet-collared
blanket coat, with cheeks reddened in the sharp April air and the
to look like—like—like a young girl? The way of the transgressor was
Barney and Valancy clanged on to the Port, so that it was dark when
they went through Deerwood again. At her old home Valancy, seized with
a sudden impulse, got out, opened the little gate and tiptoed around to
the sitting-room window. There sat her mother and Cousin Stickles
drearily, grimly knitting. Baffling and inhuman as ever. If they had
looked the least bit lonesome Valancy would have gone in. But they did
not. Valancy would not disturb them for worlds.
One day, coming home through the woods, with her arms full of trailing
Tierney. Allan Tierney, the celebrated painter of beautiful women. He
lived in New York in winter, but he owned an island cottage at the
northern end of Mistawis to which he always came the minute the ice was
out of the lake. He was reputed to be a lonely, eccentric man. He never
one who required flattery. To be painted by Allan Tierney was all the
shoulder for another shy, curious look at him. A shaft of pale spring
linnæa vine about her hair. The feathery fountain of trailing spruce
“I’ve had a caller,” said Barney the next afternoon, when Valancy had
returned from another flower quest.
my wife—as the Spirit of Muskoka, or something like that.”
Moonlight, that there are different kinds of beauty. Your imagination
is obsessed by the very obvious type of your cousin Olive. Oh, I’ve
paint her. In the horrible but expressive slang phrase, she keeps all
her goods in the shop-window. But in your subconscious mind you have a
Also, you remember your face as it was in the days when your soul was
not allowed to shine through it. Tierney said something about the curve
him _I_ didn’t want my wife painted—hung up in a salon for the mob to
stare at. Belonging to another man. For of course I couldn’t buy the
away back in his mind rather looking forward to freedom again, with no
she died—Valancy never flinched from the plain word. No “passing away”
for her. And she did not want him to be the least unhappy. But neither
They had walked over the hills in the sunset. They had the delight of
discovering a virgin spring in a ferny hollow and had drunk together
from it out of a birch-bark cup; they had come to an old tumble-down
she would live out the year Dr. Trent had allotted. She had not been
nights before Barney was out in the storm. Since then she had not
remembered she had a heart. Well, no doubt, it betokened the nearness
of the end. Nature had given up the struggle. There would be no more
no. I don’t want to forget Barney. I’d rather be miserable in heaven
They had gone around the lake one June evening in their disappearing
propeller, fished for an hour in a little creek, left their boat there,
and walked up through the woods to Port Lawrence two miles away.
Valancy prowled a bit in the shops and got herself a new pair of
this evening she had been compelled to put on the little fancy pair of
patent-leather with rather high, slender heels, which she had bought in
a fit of folly one day in the winter because of their beauty and
life. She sometimes put them on of an evening in the Blue Castle, but
this was the first time she had worn them outside. She had not found it
any too easy walking up through the woods in them, and Barney guyed her
unmercifully about them. But in spite of the inconvenience, Valancy
secretly rather liked the look of her trim ankles and high instep above
those pretty, foolish shoes and did not change them in the shop as she
The sun was hanging low above the pines when they left Port Lawrence.
To the north of it the woods closed around the town quite suddenly.
Valancy always had a sense of stepping from one world to another—from
twinkling found it shut off behind her by the armies of the pines.
A mile and a half from Port Lawrence there was a small railroad station
with a little station-house which at this hour of the day was deserted,
Valancy emerged from the woods. Off to the left a sudden curve in the
track hid it from view, but over the tree-tops beyond, the long plume
of smoke betokened the approach of a through train. The rails were
vibrating to its thunder as Barney stepped across the switch. Valancy
was a few steps behind him, loitering to gather June-bells along the
little, winding path. But there was plenty of time to get across before
the train came. She stepped unconcernedly over the first rail.
endured the agony of a thousand lifetimes.
The heel of her pretty, foolish shoe caught in a crevice of the switch.
tried to pull her clear—he tried to wrench her foot from the prisoning
hold. In vain. In a moment the train would sweep around the curve—would
be on them.
him away. Her mind was full of the hideous thought that Barney was
at the lace. As the train thundered around the curve he sprang up and
caught Valancy—dragging her clear, leaving the shoe behind her. The
wind from the train as it swept by turned to icy cold the streaming
“Thank God!” he breathed.
For a moment they stood stupidly staring at each other, two white,
shaken, wild-eyed creatures. Then they stumbled over to the little seat
at the end of the station-house and dropped on it. Barney buried his
ahead of her with unseeing eyes at the great pine woods, the stumps of
the clearing, the long, gleaming rails. There was only one thought in
she had not died of it. She was not an iota the worse for it. A little
wobbly at the knees, as any one would have been; a quicker heart-beat,
Valancy shivered as if a cold wind had suddenly chilled her to the
eloquent. Had the same thought occurred to him? Did he suddenly find
himself confronted by the appalling suspicion that he was married, not
turned sick before the horror of it. It could not be. It would be too
Impossible. He was one of the best heart specialists in Ontario. She
was foolish—unnerved by the recent horror. She remembered some of the
hideous spasms of pain she had had. There must be something serious the
matter with her heart to account for them.
for the rest of the road?”
Barney went across the clearing and picked up the parcel he had
dropped—the parcel containing her new shoes. He brought it to her and
let her take out the shoes and put them on without any assistance,
while he stood with his back to her and looked out over the pines.
They walked in silence down the shadowy trail to the lake. In silence
Barney steered his boat into the sunset miracle that was Mistawis. In
silence they went around feathery headlands and across coral bays and
silver rivers where canoes were slipping up and down in the afterglow.
In silence they went past cottages echoing with music and laughter. In
silence drew up at the landing-place below the Blue Castle.
Valancy went up the rock steps and into the house. She dropped
miserably on the first chair she came to and sat there staring through
the oriel, oblivious of Good Luck’s frantic purrs of joy and Banjo’s
stood behind her and asked gently if she felt any the worse for her
Barney went into Bluebeard’s Chamber and shut the door. She heard him
so black and steady. Not the writing of a man who didn’t know what he
was lying there, staring through the darkness. Thinking of what? Trying
that window, now paid the price of them all in this one night of
from the nebula of surmise and fear. She could not shut her eyes to
Dr. Trent had said. If there had been, those thirty seconds would have
One of them was of Barney taunting her with having tricked him. In her
dream she lost her temper and struck him violently on the head with her
all over the floor. She woke with a cry of horror—a gasp of relief—a
short laugh over the absurdity of her dream—a miserable sickening
things—inescapably, without being told—that he was not in the house or
in Bluebeard’s Chamber either. There was a curious silence in the
never done before. The room without it was dead, though the sunshine
streamed in through the oriel and dimples of light from the dancing
waves beyond quivered over the walls.
The canoe was gone but Lady Jane was under the mainland trees. So
Barney had betaken himself to the wilds. He would not return till
night—perhaps not even then. He must be angry with her. That furious
keenly now. Yet the curious numbness that pervaded her being was in a
herself to cook and eat a little breakfast. Mechanically she put the
the door and hid the key in the hollow of the old pine and crossed to
the mainland in the motor boat. She was going into Deerwood to see Dr.
know—told you there was nothing to worry over.”
pectoris—in the last stages—complicated with an aneurism. That I might
the train—that night. But I _told_ you there was nothing serious——”
into his face. He jumped to his feet and strode agitatedly about the
“Good heavens! This is the letter I meant for old Miss Jane Sterling.
From Port Lawrence. She was here that day, too. I sent you the wrong
went to another doctor——”
“I believed it,” she said faintly. “I didn’t go to any other doctor.
“Never mind,” said Valancy dully. “And so there’s nothing the matter
“Not at all since March,” answered Valancy. She remembered the
coming home safe after the storm. Had that “shock of joy” cured her?
“Then likely you’re all right. I told you what to do in the letter you
should have got. _And_ of course I supposed you’d go to another doctor.
poor old Miss Sterling. She must have got your letter—telling her there
was nothing serious the matter. Well, well, it couldn’t have made any
you. I hated to tell her the truth. You think I’m a blunt old
of the case I wasn’t quite sure of and let her know next day. But you
“Yes. I noticed that. But I thought it a mistake. I didn’t know there
“She was the only one. A lonely old soul. Lived by herself with only a
the happiness Dr. Trent’s mistake had bought her. But she was paying
hundred, she got up and went away silently. She knew that there were a
death instead of life. Snaith? Snaith? Who the devil had she married?
_him_? And her clan had let her! Well, probably that solved the
dismissed Valancy from his mind, though to the day of his death he was
ashamed of putting those letters into the wrong envelopes.
Valancy walked quickly through the back streets and through Lover’s
confused, so torn, so messy. She felt that her appearance must be the
same. She drew a sobbing breath of relief as she left the village
behind and found herself on the “up back” road. There was little fear
raucous shrieks were filled with strangers. One of them was packed with
“My wife has the fever, O then,
My wife has the fever, O then,
My wife has the fever,
Valancy flinched as if one of them had leaned from the car and cut her
across the face with a whip.
what Barney would think. Would say. Fear of the future that must be
Even that year in the Blue Castle. Even her unashamed love for Barney.
her Blue Castle and return to the brick house on Elm Street. Back to
everything she had thought left behind forever. The old bondage—the old
When Valancy reached the pines by the lake she was brought out of her
daze of pain by a startling sight. There, parked by the side of old,
battered ragged Lady Jane, was another car. A wonderful car. A purple
like a mirror and its interior plainly indicated the car caste of Vere
de Vere. On the driver’s seat sat a haughty chauffeur in livery. And in
the tonneau sat a man who opened the door and bounced out nimbly as
Valancy came down the path to the landing-place. He stood under the
clean-shaven face, though an unparalysed little imp at the back of
Valancy’s paralysed mind suggested the thought, “Such a face should
on the plump hand he outstretched to intercept Valancy an enormous
diamond winked at her. But he had a pleasant, fatherly smile, and in
them bearing that very prosperous, beaming moon-face and steel-rimmed
spectacles on the label.
middle name—was his poor mother’s. Bernard Snaith Redfern—that’s him.
seems to be home there. I’ve done some waving and yelling. Henry,
there, wouldn’t yell. He’s a one-job man. But old Doc Redfern can yell
with the best of them yet, and ain’t above doing it. Raised nothing but
a couple of crows. Guess Bernie’s out for the day.”
Trent’s revelation. In the back of her mind the aforesaid little imp
pours.” But she was not trying to think. What was the use?
“When you left this morning? Do you live—over there?”
He waved his diamond at the Blue Castle.
“Shocks seem to be in the air this morning.” The imp said this out loud
the pills and the bitters but liked the dollars. Eh? Wanted to dip
their pretty little fingers in old Doc’s millions. Eh?”
and the Blue Castle could sink to the bottom of Mistawis and vanish
“Millions,” said Dr. Redfern complacently. “And Bernie chucks them
for—that.” Again he shook the diamond contemptuously at the Blue
there.”
“Of course,” said Valancy stupidly. She led the way down to the little
cove where the disappearing propeller boat was snuggled.
“Who? Henry. Not he. Look at him sitting there disapproving.
Disapproves of the whole expedition. The trail up from the road nearly
Whose old bus is that up there?”
like the great-great-grand-mother of all the Fords.”
Better than the horrible half-dead-and-half-aliveness of the past few
minutes—or years. She waved Dr. Redfern curtly into the boat and took
him over to the Blue Castle. The key was still in the old pine—the
house still silent and deserted. Valancy took the doctor through the
living-room to the western verandah. She must at least be out where
there was air. It was still sunny, but in the southwest a great
Bernie was always fond of cats! It’s about the only thing he took from
me. He’s his poor mother’s boy.”
Valancy had been thinking idly that Barney must resemble his mother.
She had remained standing by the steps, but Dr. Redfern waved her to
the swing seat.
to stride up and down is the refinement of torture. Every nerve in her
“I don’t know that either. Likely to the woods—up back.”
“So he doesn’t tell you his comings and goings, either? Bernie was
poor mother. But I thought a lot of him. It hurt me when he disappeared
“Oh, he was in the Klondike before that—and all over the world. He used
to drop me a line now and then—never give any clue to where he was but
do. From the day he was born. Yet he was always a quiet, gentle little
chap, too. Good as gold. His poor mother died when he was only two
the formula for it, you see. Some dream that. The cash rolled in.
Bernie had everything he wanted. I sent him to the best schools—private
Everything he wanted—all the money he could spend—his own bank
account—travel—seeing the world—but he wasn’t happy. Not till he fell
in love with Ethel Traverse. Then he was happy for a little while.”
The cloud had reached the sun and a great, chill, purple shadow came
swiftly over Mistawis. It touched the Blue Castle—rolled over it.
her to the heart. “What—was—she—like?”
thoroughbred, too. One of the best families. But a bit lean in the
Then—the bust-up.”
lazily cawing in the pines. Mistawis was beckoning. Everything was the
same. Nothing was the same. It was a hundred years since yesterday.
further use for either of them.
lit out—disappeared. He wrote me from the Yukon. Said his engagement
because he was never coming back. I didn’t. What was the use? I knew
Bernie. I went on piling, up money because there wasn’t anything else
to do. But I was mighty lonely. All I lived for was them little notes
now and then from Bernie—Klondike—England—South
lonesome old dad. Then six years ago even the letters stopped. I didn’t
any checks. Bernie had fifty thousand there. And he’d never touched a
her dressing-table with the Aynsley trademark.
“Yes. The big jewellery house there. After I’d thought it over a while,
that fifteen told me there was something in the wind. The manager
communicated with the Aynsleys—his wife was an Aynsley—and found out
that Bernard Redfern had bought a pearl necklace there. His address was
write. Then I thought I’d wait till the open season for cars and come
to Port Lawrence yesterday. Enquired at the post-office. Told me they
knew nothing of any Bernard Snaith Redfern, but there was a Barney
Snaith had a P. O. box there. Lived on an island out here, they said.
and live like other people? I’ve a house up there. Big as a castle.
“Did Ethel Traverse ever marry?” queried Valancy irrelevantly.
wanting to find Bernie. I thought they’d make it up, maybe. But, of
quoted the imp in the back of Valancy’s mind.
mad when he gets mud on the car. But I’ll come back tomorrow. Meanwhile
He shook her hand and patted her kindly on the shoulder. He looked as
did not give it. Not that she would have minded. He was rather dreadful
and loud—and—and—dreadful. But there was something about him she liked.
She took him over in the motor boat and watched the lordly purple car
roll away through the woods with Henry at the wheel looking things not
lawful to be uttered. Then she went back to the Blue Castle. What she
very bad. When you are bludgeoned on the head repeatedly, you naturally
She stood briefly like a faded flower bitten by frost, by the hearth,
looking down on the white ashes of the last fire that had blazed in the
She must write a note. The imp in the back of her mind laughed. In
she left a note, generally on the pin-cushion. It was not a very
there to do but write a note? She looked vaguely about her for
anything since she had come to the Blue Castle, save memoranda of
household necessaries for Barney. A pencil sufficed for them, but now
the pencil was not to be found. Valancy absently crossed to the door of
did not know whether Barney habitually kept it locked or not. If he
it. There was not the slightest curiosity in her as she went into the
There were no beautiful women hanging by their hair on the walls. It
stove in the middle of it, its pipe sticking out through the roof. At
probably, she reflected dully. At the other end was a big writing desk
Valancy went blindly to the desk. There she stood motionless for a few
galley-proofs. The page on top bore the title _Wild Honey_, and under
the title were the words “by John Foster.”
The opening sentence—“Pines are the trees of myth and legend. They
strike their roots deep into the traditions of an older world, but wind
and star love their lofty tops. What music when old Æolus draws his bow
across the branches of the pines—” She had heard Barney say that one
day when they walked under them.
Valancy was not excited. She had absorbed all the shocks and sensations
that she could compass for one day. This affected her neither one way
nor the other. She only thought:
Lawrence bookshop and heard a customer ask the proprietor for John
them again. After all, it was none of her business. She supposed the
proprietor wanted to cover up his negligence in not getting the book in
the author’s complimentary copies, sent in advance.
Well! Valancy pushed the proofs indifferently aside and sat down in the
I went to Dr. Trent this morning and found out he had sent me the wrong
letter by mistake. There never was anything serious the matter with my
if you did not believe that. I am very sorry for the mistake. But
divorce in Canada? Of course if there is anything I can do to help or
“Your father was here today. He is coming back tomorrow. He told me
She put the letter in an envelope, wrote “Barney” across it, and left
it on the desk. On it she laid the string of pearls. If they had been
the beads she believed them she would have kept them in memory of that
wonderful year. But she could not keep the fifteen thousand dollar gift
the door and carefully hid the key in the old pine. Then she crossed to
the mainland in the disappearing propeller. She stood for a moment on
the bank, looking at her Blue Castle. The rain had not yet come, but
the sky was dark, and Mistawis grey and sullen. The little house under
the pines looked very pathetic—a casket rifled of its jewels—a lamp
“I shall never again hear the wind crying over Mistawis at night,”
Valancy paused a moment on the porch of the brick house in Elm Street.
idly noticed, was loaded with buds. The rubber-plant stood beside the
prim door. A momentary horror overcame her—a horror of the existence to
which she was returning. Then she opened the door and walked in.
“I wonder if the Prodigal Son ever felt really at home again,” she
Mrs. Frederick and Cousin Stickles were in the sitting-room. Uncle
Benjamin was there, too. They looked blankly at Valancy, realising at
once that something was wrong. This was not the saucy, impudent thing
who had laughed at them in this very room last summer. This was a
grey-faced woman with the eyes of a creature who had been stricken by a
Valancy looked indifferently around the room. She had changed so
much—and it had changed so little. The same pictures hung on the walls.
The little orphan who knelt at her never-finished prayer by the bed
whereon reposed the black kitten that never grew up into a cat. The
grey “steel engraving” of Quatre Bras, where the British regiment
forever stood at bay. The crayon enlargement of the boyish father she
had never known. There they all hung in the same places. The green
cascade of “Wandering Jew” still tumbled out of the old granite
saucepan on the window-stand. The same elaborate, never-used pitcher
stood at the same angle on the sideboard shelf. The blue and gilt vases
that had been among her mother’s wedding-presents still primly adorned
the mantelpiece, flanking the china clock of berosed and besprayed ware
that never went. The chairs in exactly the same places. Her mother and
“I’ve come home, Mother,” she said tiredly.
there was a Valancy. She had rearranged and organised her systematic
taken her place again in a society which ignored the fact that she had
want Valancy back either—“I suppose you’ve found out he has another
particularly, but she was very tired. If only the explanations were all
rattle of the beads on her mother’s sleeves, as they swung on the arms
of the reed chair, almost drove her crazy. Nothing else was worrying
“Come, come,” said Uncle Benjamin testily. But rather enjoying himself.
there’s reason enough—but what particular reason is it?”
“Valancy, if you’d only had confidence in your own mother——”
“Yes, yes, I know,” said Valancy impatiently. “What’s the use of going
Redfern’s son, of Montreal. And his father wants him to go back to
“Dr. Redfern—not the Purple Pill man?” she said.
Valancy nodded. “He’s John Foster, too—the writer of those nature
“But—but—” Mrs. Frederick was visibly agitated, though not over the
thought that she was the mother-in-law of John Foster—“_Dr. Redfern is
Benjamin waved a hand at them and frowned portentously.
Uncle Benjamin silenced with another wave the exclamation of horror he
school she had disliked the past and perfect tenses. They had always
seemed so pathetic. “I have been”—it was all over and done with.
He held the door open. As she went through he whispered, “What is the
Valancy smiled wanly. But she had come back to the old life—the old
“Not to return it,” said Uncle Benjamin with a chuckle. He shut the
door and rubbed his hands. Nodded and smiled mysteriously round the
“Poor little Doss!” he said pathetically.
“I see no reason for doubting it. She says Dr. Redfern has been there.
Why, the man is rich as wedding-cake. Amelia, I’ve always believed
there was more in Doss than most people thought. You kept her down too
“But—” hesitated Mrs. Frederick, “he—he—they told terrible tales about
slanders about other people they know absolutely nothing about. I can’t
he came into my store with Valancy. I discounted all the yarns then and
there.”
Stickles. Doubtfully, yet as one very willing to be convinced to the
on oath. He’s too drunk himself half the time to see straight. He said
he saw him lying drunk on a bench in the Park. Pshaw! Redfern’s been
asleep there. Don’t worry over _that_.”
“But his clothes—and that awful old car—” said Mrs. Frederick
the literary map of the world.”
not have bolted over the traces as she did. Just let her alone—don’t
want to. Doss is a little overstrung. Bless me, I must get in the habit
Amelia. Be very kind and sympathetic.”
and sympathetic. But she did her best. When supper was ready she went
plight was the outcome of her own lack of daughterly respect and
obedience. One could not—exactly—say things like that to the
Valancy looked dully about her old room. It, too, was so exactly the
same that it seemed almost impossible to believe in the changes that
seemed—somehow—indecent that it should be so much the same. There was
Queen Louise everlastingly coming down the stairway, and nobody had let
the forlorn puppy in out of the rain. Here was the purple paper blind
and the greenish mirror. Outside, the old carriage-shop with its
blatant advertisements. Beyond it, the station with the same derelicts
Here the old life waited for her, like some grim ogre that bided his
her. When night fell and she had undressed and got into bed, the
island under the stars. The camp-fires—all their little household jokes
and phrases and catch words—their furry beautiful cats—the lights
agleam on the fairy islands—canoes skimming over Mistawis in the magic
of morning—white birches shining among the dark spruces like beautiful
with moonshine—all the delights of her lost paradise. She would not let
herself think of Barney. Only of these lesser things. She could not
compliments—his caresses. She counted them all over as a woman might
count her jewels—not one did she miss from the first day they had met.
“Let me remember every one, God! Let me never forget one of them!”
would not be so terrible if one could forget. And Ethel Traverse. That
Montreal. Who was the right wife for a rich and famous man. Barney
dark-blue eyes would look when he said it. Ethel Traverse knew. Valancy
hated her for the knowledge—hated and envied her.
“She can never have those hours in the Blue Castle. They are _mine_,”
thought Valancy savagely. Ethel would never make strawberry jam or
She would never come to the little Mistawis shack at all.
lying on their bed looking out on stormy Mistawis and listening to the
rain streaming down on the roof? Or was he still wandering in the
wilderness, raging at the predicament in which he found himself? Hating
got up and walked the floor. Would morning never come to end this
without the old stagnation that was at least bearable. The old life
with the new memories, the new longings, the new anguish.
It was not until early afternoon the next day that a dreadful old car
clanked up Elm Street and stopped in front of the brick house. A
hatless man sprang from it and rushed up the steps. The bell was rung
hurried to the door. Uncle Benjamin had “just dropped in” to enquire
just the same. She had come down for breakfast—which she didn’t
He ushered Barney into the parlour and betook himself to the
But so dubious was Uncle Benjamin as to whether Valancy could really
tiptoe up the stairs and listened in the hall.
“Valancy dear,” said Mrs. Frederick tenderly, “your husband is in the
“Oh, Mother.” Valancy got up from the window and wrung her hands. “I
“Tell her,” hissed Uncle Benjamin through the keyhole, “that Redfern
Redfern had not said anything of the kind, but Uncle Benjamin thought
She did not even look at Uncle Benjamin as she passed him on the
he retreated to the kitchen, where he genially demanded of Cousin
“Because women need them,” beamed Uncle Benjamin.
Valancy was looking anything but beautiful when she entered the
dresses in the Blue Castle. But Barney dashed across the room and
to come here then. I walked the floor all night. Then this morning Dad
shaking her. “That’s all that’s the matter with you. Love you! Oh,
knew whether I loved you or not!”
Valancy passionately. “Don’t—don’t! I _know_. I know all about Ethel
Traverse—your father told me everything. Oh, Barney, don’t torture me!
“Valancy,” he said quietly, “Father couldn’t have told you everything
could have kissed the slender, brown hands that touched her arms. She
known he would pretend that, once the first shock of realisation was
“Never mind. I’m not going to kill you and hang you up on the wall, so
there’s no need to call for Sister Anne. I’m only going to tell you my
story from the beginning. I came back last night intending to do it.
Barney laughed bitterly and strode up and down the room a few times.
Uncle Benjamin, tiptoeing through the hall, heard the laugh and
He was a veterinary and a failure at it. He and Mother lived in a
Mother. Haven’t even a picture of her. She died when I was two years
old. She was fifteen years younger than Father—a little school teacher.
hair tonic. He’d dreamed the prescription one night, it seems. Well, it
caught on. Money began to flow in. Dad invented—or dreamed—the other
the time I was ten, with a house so big a small chap like myself always
felt lost in it. I had every toy a boy could wish for—and I was the
loneliest little devil in the world. I remember only one happy day in
Dad had gone out to see an old friend in the country and took me along.
I was turned loose in the barnyard and I spent the whole day hammering
to my roomful of playthings in the big house in Montreal I cried. But I
“When he sent me to a private school—I was only eleven—the boys ducked
me in the swimming-tank until I stood on a table and read aloud all the
advertisements of Father’s patent abominations. I did it—then”—Barney
was against me. But when I went to college and the sophs tried the same
it. But they could—and did—make my life miserable. I never heard the
last of the Pills and the Bitters and the Hair Tonic. ‘After using’ was
beasts boys can be when they get a victim like me. I had few
friends—there was always some barrier between me and the kind of people
I cared for. And the other kind—who would have been very willing to be
came out in the college magazine—a mordant thing, ridiculing Dad’s
know, Redfern, there are some things money won’t buy. For instance—it
won’t buy you a grandfather.’ Well, it was a nasty slam. I was young
illusions, which was the worst thing about it. I was a young
then—the year after I left college—I met Ethel Traverse.”
the floor moodily and didn’t notice it.
a moment. That moment was enough. The proverbial fate of the
could stomach Doc. Redfern’s son and the patent-medicine background.
“‘His money will gild the Pills and sweeten the Bitters,’ said Ethel,
with a laugh. ‘Mother told me to catch him if I could. We’re on the
against Ethel Traverse. How dared she?
“Well,”—Barney got up and began pacing round the room—“that finished
and went to the Yukon. For five years I knocked about the world—in all
a cent of Dad’s money. Then one day I woke up to the fact that I no
longer cared a hang about Ethel, one way or another. She was somebody
I’d known in another world—that was all. But I had no hankering to go
back to the old life. None of that for me. I was free and I meant to
had been published the year before, and made a hit—I had a bit of money
had no faith in anybody. I didn’t believe there was such a thing as
real friendship or true love in the world—not for me, anyhow—the son of
Purple Pills. I used to revel in all the wild yarns they told of me. In
fact, I’m afraid I suggested a few of them myself. By mysterious
remarks which people interpreted in the light of their own
my father’s millions. There was no other reason why you should want to
And then—I found you the best and jolliest and dearest little pal and
the reality of friendship and love. The world seemed good again just
just as we were. I knew that, the night I came home and saw my
homelight shining out from the island for the first time. And knew you
were there waiting for me. After being homeless all my life it was
beautiful to have a home. To come home hungry at night and know there
the switch. Then it came like a lightning flash. I knew I couldn’t live
bearings for a while. That’s why I acted like a mule. But the thought
that drove me to the tall timber was the awful one that you were going
to die. I’d always hated the thought of it—but I supposed there wasn’t
all the specialists in the world—that something surely could be done
those moments on the track hadn’t even hurt you. And I found your
can’t. What’s the use, Barney? Of course, you’re sorry for me—of course
you want to do the best you can to straighten out the mess. But it
up and pointed tragically to the mirror over the mantel. Certainly, not
even Allan Tierney could have seen beauty in the woeful, haggard little
face reflected there.
Barney didn’t look at the mirror. He looked at Valancy as if he would
“Love you! Girl, you’re in the very core of my heart. I hold you there
I love you with all there is of me to love. Heart, soul, brain. Every
fibre of body and spirit thrilling to the sweetness of you. There’s
nobody in the world for me but you, Valancy.”
“You don’t want to believe it,” said Barney in the silk-smooth voice of
me. You’re ashamed of the Pills and the Liniment, just as she was. Your
Stirling pride can’t stomach them. It was all right as long as you
the little low laugh of the triumphant lover.
Uncle Benjamin, who had been frozen with horror at the keyhole,
Providence, got out the family Bible and made an entry under
father—somehow—gave me to understand that you _still_ loved _her_.”
“He would. Dad holds the championship for making blunders. If there’s a
when they believe in them.”
“My life is in Mistawis—and all the wild places of the world. I’m not
going to ask you to live the life of a society woman. Of course, we
must spend a bit of the time with Dad—he’s lonely and old——”
shop with the labels off. Likewise it’s the pride of Dad’s heart. We’ll
get a little house somewhere outside of Montreal—in the real
travelling. I want you to see the Alhambra—it’s the nearest thing to
the Blue Castle of your dreams I can think of. And there’s an old-world
garden in Italy where I want to show you the moon rising over Rome
through the dark cypress-trees.”
“Will that be any lovelier than the moon rising over Mistawis?”
life in ugliness. You know nothing of the beauty of the world. We’ll
climb mountains—hunt for treasures in the bazaars of Samarcand—search
out the magic of east and west—run hand in hand to the rim of the
there are a million things I want to show you—do with you—say to you.
out like this. It makes one feel that there is no use in behaving
about a dust-pile showed that. Of course I don’t think there was ever a
thing the matter with her heart. Or perhaps Snaith or Redfern or
Mistawis hut and cured her. It would make quite a testimonial for the
“Well, he’s certainly no collar ad man. Though I must say there is
something rather distinguished about him, now that he has cut his hair
and put on decent clothes. I really think, Cecil, you should exercise
“Old Doc Redfern has given them two millions for a wedding-present.
Evidently the Purple Pills bring in the bacon. They’re going to spend
the fall in Italy and the winter in Egypt and motor through Normandy in
“Uncle Ben is a scream. Likewise Uncle James. The fuss they all make
Redfern.’ Mother and Father are as bad as the rest. And they can’t see
that Valancy is just laughing at them all in her sleeve.”
Valancy and Barney turned under the mainland pines in the cool dusk of
the September night for a farewell look at the Blue Castle. Mistawis
and Tuck were cawing lazily in the old pines. Good Luck and Banjo were
care of them until Barney and Valancy came back. Aunt Wellington and
Cousin Sarah and Aunt Alberta had also entreated the privilege of
looking after them, but to Cousin Georgiana was it given. Valancy was
terrified her. But, despite the delights before her—‘the glory that was
Greece and the grandeur that was Rome’—lure of the ageless Nile—glamour
of the Riviera—mosque and palace and minaret—she knew perfectly well
that no spot or place or home in the world could ever possess the
